pmc Science Science 358 wtpa Science (New York, N.Y.) 0036-8075 1095-9203 pmc-is-collection-domain yes pmc-collection-title UKPMC Funders Author Manuscripts PMC7614978 PMC7614978.1 7614978 7614978 EMS185071 37590359 10.1126/science.add7564 EMS185071 WTPA185071 WTMS185071 UKMS185071 1 Article Yolk sac cell atlas reveals multiorgan functions during human early
development Goh Issac 1 2 Botting Rachel A. 1 2 Rose Antony 1 2 Webb Simone 1 2 Engelbert Justin 2 Gitton Yorick 3 Stephenson Emily 1 2 Londoño Mariana Quiroga 4 Mather Michael 2 Mende Nicole 4 Imaz-Rosshandler Ivan 4 5 Yang Lu 1 Horsfall Dave 1 2 Basurto-Lozada Daniela 1 2 Chipampe Nana-Jane 1 Rook Victoria 1 Lee Jimmy Tsz Hang 1 Ton Mai-Linh 4 Keitley Daniel 1 6 Mazin Pavel 1 Vijayabaskar M.S. 4 Hannah Rebecca 4 Gambardella Laure 1 Green Kile 7 Ballereau Stephane 1 Inoue Megumi 3 Tuck Elizabeth 1 Lorenzi Valentina 1 Kwakwa Kwasi 1 Alsinet Clara 1 8 Olabi Bayanne 1 2 Miah Mohi 1 2 Admane Chloe 1 2 Popescu Dorin-Mirel 2 Acres Meghan 2 Dixon David 2 Ness Thomas 9 Coulthard Rowen 9 Lisgo Steven 2 Henderson Deborah J 2 Dann Emma 1 Suo Chenqu 1 Kinston Sarah J. 4 Park Jong-eun 10 Polanski Krzysztof 1 Marioni John 1 11 12 van Dongen Stijn 1 Meyer Kerstin B. 1 de Bruijn Marella 13 Palis James 14 Behjati Sam 1 15 Laurenti Elisa 4 Wilson Nicola K. 4 Vento-Tormo Roser 1 Chédotal Alain 3 Bayraktar Omer 1 Roberts Irene 16 Jardine Laura 1 2 * Göttgens Berthold 4 * Teichmann Sarah A. 1 17 * Haniffa Muzlifah 1 2 18 * 
 1 Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK 
 2 Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, NE2 4HH, UK 
 3 Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision,
Paris, France 
 4 Department of Haematology, Wellcome-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell
Institute, CB2 0AW, UK 
 5 MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge Biomedical Campus,
CD2 0QH, UK 
 6 Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge UK 
 7 Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University,
NE2 4HH, UK 
 8 Centre Nacional d’Analisi Genomica-Centre de Regulacio
Genomica (CNAG-CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST),
Barcelona, Spain 
 9 NovoPath, Department of Pathology, Newcastle Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK 
 10 Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, South
Korea 
 11 EMBL-EBI, Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge, UK 
 12 CRUK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK 
 13 MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, MRC Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, OX3 9DS,
UK 
 14 Department of Pediatrics, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, 14642, NY, USA 
 15 Department of Paediatrics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK 
 16 Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK 
 17 Theory of Condensed Matter Group, Cavendish Laboratory/Department
of Physics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 
 18 Department of Dermatology and NIHR Newcastle Biomedical Research
Centre, Newcastle Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 4LP,
UK * Corresponding author.
 laura.jardine@ncl.ac.uk  (L.J.);
 bg200@cam.ac.uk  (B.G.);  st9@sanger.ac.uk 
(S.A.T.);  mh32@sanger.ac.uk  (M.H.) 18 8 2023 18 8 2023 381 6659 444059 eadd7564 eadd7564 18 08 2023 26 08 2023 26 08 2023 23 09 2024 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This work is licensed under a  BY
4.0  International license. The extraembryonic yolk sac (YS) ensures delivery of nutritional support
and oxygen to the developing embryo but remains ill-defined in humans. We
therefore assembled a comprehensive multiomic reference of human YS from 3-8
post-conception weeks by integrating single-cell protein and gene expression
data. Beyond its recognized role as a site of hematopoiesis, we highlight roles
in metabolism, coagulation, vascular development, and hematopoietic regulation.
We reconstructed the emergence and decline of YS hematopoietic stem/progenitor
cells from hemogenic endothelium and revealed a YS-specific accelerated route to
macrophage production that seeds developing organs. The multiorgan functions of
YS are superseded as intraembryonic organs develop, effecting a multifaceted
relay of vital functions as pregnancy proceeds. Structured Abstract Introduction The yolk sac (YS) generates the first blood and immune cells and
provides nutritional and metabolic support to the developing embryo. Our
current understanding of its functions derives from pivotal studies in model
systems and insights from human studies are limited. Single-cell genomics
technologies have facilitated the interrogation of human developmental
tissues at unprecedented resolution. Atlases of blood and immune cells from
multiple organs have been greatly enhanced by focused, time-resolved
analyses of specific tissues. Rationale To characterize the functions of human YS, we performed single-cell
RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and cellular indexing of transcriptomes and
epitopes (CITE-seq) on YS and paired embryonic liver. After integration with
external datasets, our reference comprised 169,798 cells from 10 samples
spanning 4-8 post-conception weeks (PCW) or Carnegie stages (CS) 10-23. A
repertoire of 2D and 3D imaging techniques provided spatial context and
validation. We compared the products of two hematopoietic inducible
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) culture protocols against our reference. Results We determined that YS metabolic and nutritional support originates in
the endoderm and that endoderm produces coagulation proteins and
hematopoietic growth factors (erythropoietin (EPO) and thrombopoietin
(THPO)). Although metabolic and coagulation protein production was conserved
between humans, mice, and rabbits, EPO and THPO production was observed in
humans and rabbits only. We reconstructed trajectories from YS hemogenic endothelium to early
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs). Using transcriptomic
signatures of early and definitive hematopoiesis, we parsed YS HSPCs into
myeloid-biased early HSPCs, and lymphoid and megakaryocyte-biased definitive
HSPCs. Human embryonic liver remained macroscopically pale prior to CS14,
when hematopoietic cells first emerge from the
aorta–gonad–mesonephros (AGM) region. Tracking hemoglobin
subtypes led us to conclude that initial erythropoiesis is YS-restricted. In
mice by contrast, Hb subtypes suggested two waves of pre-AGM erythropoiesis,
including maturation in the macroscopically red embryonic liver. Before CS14, monocytes were absent and macrophages originated from
HPSCs via a pre-macrophage cell state. After CS14, monocytes emerged and a
second, monocyte-dependent differentiation trajectory was reconstructed. A
rare subset of TREM2 +  macrophages, with a microglia-like
transcriptomic signature, was present after CS14. The iPSC system optimized
for macrophage production recapitulated the two routes to macrophage
differentiation but did not generate the diversity of macrophages (including
TREM2 +  macrophages) observed in developing tissues. Conclusions Our study illuminates a previously obscure phase of human
development, where vital functions are delivered by the YS acting as a
transient extraembryonic organ. Our comprehensive single cell atlas
represents a valuable resource for studying the cellular differentiation
pathways unique to early life and leveraging these for tissue engineering
and cellular therapy. Multiorgan functions of the human yolk sac We characterized functions of the developing human YS,
combining scRNA-seq and CITE-seq, with 2D and 3D imaging
techniques. Our findings revealed YS contributions to metabolic
and nutritional support, and early hematopoiesis. We
characterized myeloid bias in early hematopoiesis, distinct
myeloid differentiation trajectories, evolutionary divergence in
initial erythropoiesis, and YS contributions to developing
tissue macrophages. 
 pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript yes pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement yes pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY The primary human yolk sac (YS) derives from the hypoblast at the time of embryo
implantation (Carnegie stage 4, (CS4); ˜1 post conception week (PCW)) ( 1 ,  2 ). The
secondary YS supersedes the primary structure at around CS6 (˜2.5 PCW) and
persists until CS23 (˜8 PCW) ( 1 ,  2 ). The secondary YS has three tissue compartments:
mesothelium (an epithelial layer interfacing the amniotic fluid), mesoderm (including
endothelial cells, blood cells, and smooth muscle), and endoderm (an inner layer
interfacing the vitelline-fluid-filled YS cavity) ( 1 ). The functions of the YS in nutrient uptake, transport, and metabolism
are phylogenetically conserved ( 2 ). Hematopoiesis originates in the YS of mammals, birds, and some ray-finned fishes
( 3 ). The first wave of mouse YS hematopoiesis
yields primitive erythroid cells, macrophages, and megakaryocytes (MKs) from embryonic
day 7.5 (E7.5) ( 3 ,  4 ). After circulation begins, a second wave of erythromyeloid and
lymphomyeloid progenitors arise in the YS and supply the embryo ( 5 ). Finally, definitive hematopoietic stem cells arise in the
aorta–gonad–mesonephros (AGM) region of the dorsal aorta and seed the
fetal liver ( 6 ). Limited evidence suggests that
the YS also provides the first blood cells during human development. Primitive
erythroblasts expressing embryonic globin genes, surrounded by endothelium, emerge in
the YS at CS6 (˜2.5 PCW) ( 7 ,  8 ). Hematopoietic progenitors and macrophages are
detectable at CS11 (˜4 PCW) ( 9 ), with MKs,
monocytes, mast cells and innate lymphocytes also reported ( 9 ,  10 ). Long-term
multilineage repopulating (definitive) hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs)
originate in the AGM at CS14 (˜5 PCW) ( 11 ). Equivalent cells are subsequently found in the YS at CS16 and the liver
from CS17 ( 11 ,  12 ). In this study, we report a time-resolved atlas of the human YS, combining
single-cell protein and gene expression with imaging, providing a comprehensive
depiction of the metabolic and hematopoietic functions of the human YS, as well as a
benchmark for in vitro culture systems aiming to recapitulate human early
development. A single-cell atlas of human YS We performed droplet-based single cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) to profile
human YS, and integrated with external datasets to yield 169,798 high-quality cells
from 10 samples spanning 4-8 PCW (CS10-CS23), which can be interrogated on our
interactive web portal ( https://developmental.cellatlas.io/yolk-sac  ( 13 )) ( Fig. 1, A to C ;
 fig. S1 ,  A to C ; and  data S1  to  S18 ). Graph-based Leiden
clustering yielded 39 cell types grouped into 15 broad categories including
hematopoietic cells, endoderm, mesoderm, and mesothelium. Key marker genes were
validated by plate-based scRNA-seq (Smart-seq2) ( Fig.
1, C and D ;  fig. S1, B
to F ; and  data S3 to
S5, S8, S17, and S18 ). We used the term “HSPC” for cells
collectively based on their expression of a core HSPC signature (e.g.,  CD34,
SPINK2 , and  HLF ) without implying long-term
repopulating capacity or multilineage potential. With comparison datasets, unless
otherwise specified, we adopted published annotations ( data S6 and S7 ). Surface
protein expression from CITE-seq of n=2 YS cell suspensions ( fig. S1, G  and  H ) identified combinatorial
antigens for cell purification and functional characterization ( fig. S2A  and  data S9, S19, and S20 ). We
generated matched embryonic liver scRNA-seq and CITE-seq data ( figs. S2, B to F , and  S3 ,  A to C, and S5, S10, S21, and
S22 ), which confirmed the presence of discrete B cell progenitor stages
only in the liver ( fig. S3C 
and  data S12 ). Around half
of YS lymphoid cells were innate lymphoid progenitors (I. Lymp. Prog.), which
terminated in natural killer (NK) and innate lymphoid cell (ILC) precursor states on
force-directed graph (FDG) visualization ( fig. S3D ). A small population of cells were termed
“Lymphoid B lineage” due to their expression of  CD19,
CD79B , and  IGLL1 . These cells did not express the
typical B1 markers  CD5, CD27 , or  CCR10  however.
Given the absence of distinct B cell progenitor stages and their later emergence
(>5 PCW), these may constitute migratory B cells of fetal liver origin ( fig. S3 ,  D  and  E ). Three-dimensional visualization of the YS by light sheet microscopy marked
the CD34 hi LYVE1 lo  vitelline artery and
CD34 lo LYVE1 hi  vitelline vein contiguous with a branching
network of CD34 lo LYVE1 hi  vessels ( Fig. 1E ;  fig.
S3F ;  data S23 ;
and  movies S1  and  S2 ). The
CD34 lo LYVE1 hi IL33 +  vessels
were situated within the mesoderm, a distinct layer beneath the
ASGR1 + SPINK1 +  endoderm ( Fig. 1, E and F , and  figs. S3 ,  F  to  I , and  S4, A and B ).
 ACTA2 +  smooth muscle cells formed a sublayer between
mesoderm and endoderm ( Fig. 1F  and  fig. S4 ,  A  and  B ). Macrophages
( C1QA + CD1C +/−  and
a small number of dendritic cells (DCs)
( C1QA +/− CD1C + )
were identified within the mesoderm ( Fig. 1F 
and  fig. S4A ). The most prevalent hematopoietic cell types in early YS (CS10; ˜4
PCW) were HSPCs, erythroid cells, macrophages, and megakaryocytes. Both HSPCs and
MKs proportionately diminished thereafter, whereas erythroid cells and macrophages
were sustained. DCs and  TREM2 +  macrophages did not
emerge until >6 PCW ( Fig. 1G  and  data S4 ). The ratio of
hematopoietic to nonhematopoietic cells was around 3:1 in early YS (CS10; ˜4
PCW), with endoderm relatively abundant ( Fig.
1G ). The ratio approached 1:3 in late YS (CS22-23; ˜8 PCW) due to
expansion of fibroblasts ( Fig. 1G ). The
transcriptional profile of MKs was consistent across gestation, but both erythroid
cells and macrophages had early and late gestation-specific molecular states,
suggesting dual waves of production ( Fig. 1G ;
 fig. S4C ; and  data S24 ). Multiorgan functions of YS YS endoderm coexpressing  APOA1/2, APOC3 , and
 TTR , (similar to embryonic/fetal hepatocytes) was present from
gastrulation at ˜2-3 PCW ( 14 ) ( Fig. 2A  and  data S3 ,  S7 , and  S21 ). YS endoderm expressed
higher levels of serine protease 3 ( PRSS3 ), glutathione
S-transferase alpha 2 ( GSTA2 ), and multi-functional protein
galectin 3 ( LGALS3 ), compared to embryonic liver hepatocytes,
whereas hepatocytes expressed a more extensive repertoire of detoxification enzymes,
including alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenases and cytochrome P450 enzymes ( fig. S4D  and  data S3 ,  S7 , and  S21 ). Both cell states shared
gene modules implicated in coagulation and lipid and glucose metabolism ( Fig. 2B  and  data S25 ), which were also
conserved in mouse and rabbit extraembryonic endoderm ( fig. S4 ,  E  and  F , and  data S25 ). The expression of
transport proteins (alpha-fetoprotein and albumin), a protease inhibitor
(alpha-1-antitrypsin), erythropoietin (EPO), and coagulation proteins (thrombin,
prothrombin, and fibrin) were validated in human YS endoderm and embryonic liver
hepatocytes ( Fig. 2C  and  fig. S4G ). From the earliest timepoints, YS endoderm expressed genes for anticoagulant
proteins antithrombin III ( SERPINC1 ) and protein S
( PROS1 ) and components of the tissue factor-activated extrinsic
coagulation pathway—thrombin ( F2 ), factor VII
( F7 ), and factor X  (F10)  ( Fig. 2D  and  data S25 ), confirmed at the protein level for thrombin ( Fig. 2C ). Intrinsic pathway factors VIII, IX, XI,
and XII ( F8, F9, F11 , and  F12 ) were minimally
expressed in YS, but were expressed by embryonic liver hepatocytes ( Fig. 2D ). Tissue factor, antithrombin III and
fibrinogen subunits were also expressed in mouse extraembryonic endoderm and rabbit
YS endoderm ( fig. S4E ).
Embryonic lethality of homozygous-null mice lacking prothrombin, thrombin, and
coagulation factor V prior to liver synthetic function (i.e., at E9-12) implies
functional relevance of YS expression ( Fig. 2D 
and  data S25 ) ( 15 ,  16 ),
whereby coagulant and anticoagulant pathways develop in parallel to balance
hemostasis. YS endoderm cells expressed EPO and THPO that are critical for
erythropoiesis and megakaryopoiesis ( Fig. 2, C and
D ;  fig. S4H ; and
 data S25  and  S26 ). In mouse development,
EPO is produced by fetal liver and is only essential for definitive and the later
stages of primitive erythropoiesis, with
 Epo / Epor -knockout mice dying at around E13 ( 17 ). An EPO source prior to liver development
is therefore likely not needed in mice. Accordingly, EPO has not been found in mouse
YS ( 18 ) ( fig. S4E ). In parallel to
human YS, rabbit YS endoderm also produced EPO at gestational stages preceding liver
development ( fig. S4E ). We
compiled a 12-organ integrated human fetal atlas spanning 3-19 PCW (k=3.12 million,
n=150;  fig. S8, G  and  H , and  data S6 and S7 ) and observed
that EPO and THPO production were restricted to YS and liver ( fig. S4H ), specifically to YS
endoderm and liver hepatocytes ( fig. S4I ). Differentially expressed genes between early and late YS
endoderm revealed active retinoic acid and lipid metabolic processes until 7 PCW,
after which genes associated with cell stress and death were expressed ( Fig. 2E  and  data S26 ). A decline in the
proportion of YS endoderm cells producing EPO was compensated by onset of EPO
production by hepatocytes at 7 PCW ( fig. S4J ). Thus, the human YS plays a critical role supporting hematopoiesis,
metabolism, coagulation, and erythroid cell mass regulation before these functions
are taken over by the embryonic/fetal liver, and then ultimately, by the adult liver
(metabolism and coagulation), bone marrow (BM) (hematopoiesis), and kidney
(erythroid cell mass regulation) ( Fig. 2F ). Early versus definitive hematopoiesis in YS and liver Human YS hematopoietic progenitors spanned two groups: HSPCs characterized
by  SPINK2, CYTL1 , and  HOXB9  expression and cycling
HSPCs characterized by cell cycle-associated genes such as  MKI67 
and  TOP2A  ( fig.
S5A and data S17 ). Using markers recently associated with early
( DDIT4, SLC2A3, RGS16 , and  LIN28A ) and
definitive ( KIT, ITGA4, CD74 , and  PROCR ) HSPCs
( 12 ), we identified early and definitive
fractions within both HSPCs and cycling HSPCs ( Fig. 3,
A to C ). Early and definitive HSPCs expressed canonical HSPC genes such
as  SPINK2, HOPX , and  HLF  ( Fig. 3A  and  data S17 ), but diverged in expression of genes involved in multiple
processes such as enzymes ( GAD1 ), growth factors
( FGF23 ), adhesion molecules ( SELL ), and
patterning genes ( HOXA7 ) ( fig. S5C  and  data S17 ). By logistic regression (LR), YS HSPCs had a high median
probability of class correspondence to liver HSCs, but this probability was higher
for definitive than for early HSPCs ( fig. S5B ). YS cycling HSPCs had a bipartite probability
distribution between liver MPP and CMP, with the definitive cycling HSPC more
“MPP-like” than the early version. Differential protein expression in
YS CITE-seq data indicated that CD122, CD194 (CCR4), and CD357 mark early HSPCs
whereas CD44, CD48, CD93, and CD197 (CCR7) mark definitive HSPCs ( fig. S5D  and  data S27 ), in keeping with
the reported use of CD34 and CD44 to segregate early and definitive-type HSPCs by
FACS ( 19 ). We confirmed that an iPSC-derived
culture system reported to generate definitive HSPCs did express RNA markers
characteristic of definitive HSPCs ( 12 ), but
an iPSC-derived culture system optimized for macrophage production ( 20 ) did not ( Fig.
3A ). To assess cross tissue HSPC heterogeneity, we integrated HSPCs across
hematopoietic organs ( Fig. 3C  and  fig. S5E  and  data S6 and S7 ). By kernel
density estimation score (KDE) on integrated UMAP embeddings, YS definitive HSPCs
qualitatively colocalized with definitive HSPCs from age-matched liver ( Fig. 3C  and  fig. S5E ). From exclusively
early HSPCs at ˜3 PCW, we observed rapid accumulation of definitive HSPCs
after AGM development CS14 (˜5 PCW), likely accounting for the increase in
the YS HSPC/progenitor fraction at 8 PCW ( Figs.
1G  and  3B  and  fig. S5F ). Next, we examined the transition from YS to liver hematopoiesis. Prior to
AGM, the human embryonic liver is macroscopically pale, suggesting that
erythropoiesis predominantly occurs in the YS ( Fig.
3D ). We tracked the proportional representation of hemoglobin (Hb)
subtypes over time as a proxy for YS versus embryonic liver contributions.
 HBZ  and  HBE1  (genes for Hb Gower 1) were
restricted to YS erythroblasts, whereas  HBG1  (which forms fetal
Hb/HbF in combination with an alpha chain) was expressed in fetal liver
erythroblasts ( 21 – 26 ) ( Fig.
3E  and  fig.
S5H ). The sustained  HBZ  production in YS for several days
prior to liver bud formation (4 PCW) was consistent with a scenario where YS
supports initial erythropoiesis. At 7 PCW, the embryonic liver contained both
 HBZ  and  HBG1  ( Fig. 3E ), in keeping with previous studies of Hb switching ( 8 ). By 8 PCW, embryonic liver erythroblasts
expressed  HBZ- repressors and were  HBG1- dominant,
as we have previously shown ( 10 ). By
contrast, the mouse liver was macroscopically red prior to AGM maturation ( Fig. 3D ). Tracking Hb subtype usage in the mouse,
we noted two waves of pre-AGM erythropoiesis: an initial wave with
 Hbb-y  and  Hba- x -Hba-a1/2 , and
a second wave mirrored in both YS and torso/liver
( Hbb - bt1  and  Hbb-bs ) ( fig. S5 ,  G  to  I ). Thus, there is a
species-specific difference in YS erythropoiesis, and a rapid shift in Hb usage
following AGM development in humans. We examined data from human gastrulation (˜2-3 PCW) and CS10-11
(˜4 PCW)—timepoints prior to AGM-HSPC formation—to explore the
differentiation potential of early HSPCs. At gastrulation, the YS hematopoietic
landscape had a tripartite differentiation structure, with erythroid, MK, and
myeloid differentiation ( Fig. 3F ). This
structure was also observed in mouse YS ( fig. S6 ,  A  and  B , and
 data S5 and S11 ).
Differential-fate-prediction analysis demonstrated that early HSPCs pre-AGM at
CS10-11 (˜4 PCW) were myeloid-biased, consistent with previous observations
( 9 ). However, the abundance of
differentiating erythroid and MK cells at CS10-11 suggested that an earlier wave of
erythroid/MK production had occurred ( Fig. 3G 
and  fig. S6C ). Post-AGM,
the model predicted that remaining early HSPCs were erythroid and MK-biased, whereas
definitive HSPCs were lymphoid- and MK-biased ( Fig.
3G ). This was in keeping with the first appearance of YS lymphoid cells
(ILC progenitors, NK cells, and B lineage cells) post CS14 ( Fig. 1G ). Differential-fate-prediction analyses suggested that
iPSC-derived HSPCs were embryonic erythroid-, myeloid-, and MK-biased, whereas
definitive iPSC-derived HSPCs were lymphoid-, MK-, erythroid-, and myeloid-primed,
consistent with the predicted lineage potential of their in vivo early and
definitive counterparts ( Fig. 3H  and  fig. S6D ). The lifespan of YS HSPCs HSPCs arise from hemogenic endothelium (HE) in the aorta, YS, BM, placenta,
and embryonic head in mice ( 27 – 31 ). In human AGM, definitive HSPCs emerge from
 IL33 + ALDH1A1 +  arterial
endothelial cells (AECs) via
 KCNK17 + ALDH1A1 +  HE
( 32 ). Dissecting YS endothelial cell (EC)
states in greater detail, the broad category of PLVAP +  ECs included AECs
and HE, whereas LYVE1 +  ECs encompassed sinusoidal, immature, and
VWF-expressing ECs ( Fig. 4A ;  fig. S7 ,  A  and  B , and  data S4  and  S5 ). HE was a transient
feature of early YS ( Fig. 4A ). Along inferred
trajectories, YS HSPCs appeared to arise from AECs via HE as in AGM ( 12 ), sequentially upregulating expected genes
such as  ALDH1A1 (33)  ( Fig.
4B ). The same EC intermediate states and transition points were identified in
both iPSC culture systems ( Fig. 4B  and  fig. S7C ). In keeping with
their more recent endothelial origin, we found that YS HSPCs and AGM HSPCs, but not
embryonic liver or fetal BM HSPCs retained an EC gene signature characterized by the
expression of  KDR, CDH5, ESAM , and  PLVAP  ( Fig. 4C ). Receptor–ligand interactions capable of supporting HSPC expansion and
maintenance in YS were predicted using CellPhoneDB ( 34 ) and compared to predictions in fetal BM ( 35 ). We identified YS ECs, fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells,
and endoderm as likely interacting partners ( Fig. 4, D
to F , and  data
S28 ). YS ECs, like fetal BM ECs, were predicted to maintain and support
the HSPC pool ( 36 ) through the production of
stem cell factor ( KITLG ) and  NOTCH1/2 , although
the repertoire of NOTCH ligands diverged between tissues ( DLL1  and
 JAG1  in YS and  DLK1, JAG1/2, NOV , and
 DLL4  in BM) ( Fig. 4D ). YS
endoderm was predicted to support HSC pool expansion ( 37 ) through  WNT5A  signaling to
 FZD3 .  WNT5A  was also expressed by a wide range
of BM stromal cell types, but BM HSPCs were predicted to respond via
 FZD6  rather than  FZD3 . All YS stromal
fractions contributed to extracellular matrix, which provides a substrate for
adhesion but also modifies HSPC function, with  FN1  (from all
fractions) potentially expanding the HSPC pool and  VTN  (from
endoderm) contributing to long-term HSC-like quiescence ( Fig. 4, D and F ) ( 38 ,
 39 ). Although BM HSPCs were also
predicted to adhere to extracellular matrix proteins, the integrins and matrix
constituents differed. YS endoderm was predicted to form unique interactions with
HSPCs via  EPO , which may influence the fate of differentiating
progenitors ( 40 ), and  THPO ,
which supports HSC quiescence and adhesion in BM ( 41 ). No BM stromal source of  EPO  or
 THPO  was detectable in our data however ( 10 ,  35 ). Thus, these
anatomically different hematopoietic tissues use similar pathways to support HSPCs,
albeit with tissue-specific components. YS HSPC receptor to stromal ligand interactions diminished between CS17-CS23
(4-8 PCW), including loss of cytokine and growth factor support and loss of
 TFGB1, WNT , and  NOTCH2  signals ( Fig. 4E ;  fig. S7E ; and  data S29 ). In many interactions, there was reduction in HSPC receptor
expression as well as stromal ligand expression ( Fig.
4E ; and  fig. S7, D and
E; and data S29 ), yet ligands were still expressed in age-matched liver
and AGM stromal cells ( fig. S7F
and data S29 ). Adhesive interactions in YS were also predicted to be
significantly modulated ( fig. S7,
F and G, and data S29 ). Although aged-matched liver provided
opportunities for adhesion with stromal cells, the AGM did not ( fig. S7F and data S29 ). YS
interactions gained between CS17 and CS23 included endoderm-derived
 IL13  signaling to the  TMEM219 -encoded receptor
implicated in the induction of apoptosis ( Fig.
4D ). Although limited conclusions can be made from studying cells that
passed quality control for cell viability, we did observe upregulation in
proapoptotic gene scores in late-stage YS HSPCs, both early and definitive ( fig. S7H ). Despite marked change in the stromal environment of later stage YS, the
proportion of HSPC to cycling HSPC remained stable ( fig. S5F ). Differential
lineage priming analysis revealed that very few HSPCs remained in CS22-23 (8 PCW) YS
and most cells were terminally differentiated ( fig. S6C ). Thus, it is likely
that an early burst of early HSPC production arises from transient YS HE, a later
influx of definitive HSPCs derives from AGM, and a loss of stromal support between
6-8 PCW, results in apoptosis and depletion of remaining HSPCs by terminal
differentiation. An accelerated route to macrophage production in YS and iPSC culture Although YS hematopoietic progenitors are restricted to a short time window
in early gestation, mouse models suggest that they contribute to long-lived
macrophage populations in some tissues ( 42 ).
By scRNA-seq, transcriptionally similar macrophage populations can be identified in
YS and fetal brain prior to the emergence of definitive HSPCs ( 9 ). In our previous work, k=6682 YS macrophages resolved into
two subgroups ( 10 ). By contrast, our
integrated dataset of k=45,118 YS macrophages in the current study revealed a
greater heterogeneity including pre-macrophages,  C1QA/B/C  and
 MRC1- expressing macrophages, and a rare
 TREM2 +  macrophage subset ( fig. S8A ). Promonocytes
expressing  HMGB2, LYZ , and  LSP1  and monocytes
expressing  S100A8, S100A9  and  MNDA  were also
detected ( fig. S8A ).
Monocytes were observed only after liver development and AGM-derived hematopoiesis
at CS14 (˜5 PCW), but pre-macrophages and macrophages formed as early as CS10
(˜4 PCW) ( Fig. 5A  and  fig. S8B ). Although the
potential of early YS HSPCs to differentiate into monocytes has been demonstrated in
vitro ( 9 ), there were too few promonocytes and
monocyte progenitors in our data prior to CS14 to reliably confirm this potential.
We identified two populations of YS monocytes, which diverged in expression of
adhesion molecules. YS Monocyte 2 expressed adhesion molecules  ICAM3,
SELL , and  PLAC8  ( Fig.
5B ), which were also expressed on fetal liver but not YS HSPCs ( fig. S5C ). YS Monocyte 2 had
a high probability of class prediction against FL monocytes ( fig. S8C ). Thus, Monocyte 2
is likely a recirculating FL monocyte, although sequential waves of monocytopoiesis
occurring within the YS cannot be excluded. YS CITE-seq data was used to identify
discriminatory markers (CD15 and CD43 for Monocyte 1; CD9 and CD35 for Monocyte 2)
and provide protein-level validation for differential expression of
 SELL  (CD62L) and CD14 ( fig. S8D  and  data S20 ). The YS pre-macrophage uniquely expressed high levels of  PTGS2,
MSL1 , and  SPIA1 , as well as expressing progenitor
genes ( SPINK2, CD34 , and  SMIM24 ), macrophage genes
( C1QA  and  MRC1 ), and  CD52 ,
which is typically associated with monocytes ( fig. S8A ). This YS
pre-macrophage rapidly declined by 5 PCW ( Fig.
5A ) and had no equivalent in embryonic liver ( fig. S8C ), KNN graph-based
FDG and partition-based graph abstraction (PAGA) suggested a direct
monocyte-independent trajectory to YS macrophages prior to CS14 ( Fig. 5C  and  data S5 ). In this pre-AGM
trajectory, a transition from HSPC to pre-macrophages, then macrophages (nodes 1, 5,
and 6 in  Fig. 5C  upper panel) fit with our
predictions that pre-AGM HSPCs exhibit myeloid bias ( Fig. 3G ). After CS14, there was a clear differentiation trajectory from
cycling HSPC to monocytes and monocyte–macrophages (nodes 1-7 in  Fig. 5C  lower panel). After CS14, 15.33% of this
macrophage pool was proliferating and CellRank RNA state transition analysis was in
keeping with active self-renewal ( fig. S8E  and  data
S5 ). Using PySCENIC, YS pre-macrophages were predicted to employ a group
of transcription factors (TFs), including  FLI1  and
 MEF2C , that have been reported in the differentiation of
multiple lineages ( 43 ,  44 ). By contrast, the monocyte-dependent route (CMPs, monocyte
progenitor (MOP), promonocytes and monocytes) relied on recognized myeloid
transcription factors such as  SPI1, CEBPA , and
 IRF8  ( Fig. 5D  and  data S30 ).
 TREM2 +  macrophages expressed microglia-associated
transcripts  CX3CR1, OLFML3 , and  TREM2  and were
observed in YS only after CS14 ( Fig. 5A, C and
E ;  fig. S8A ; and
 data S13 ). By PAGA and
CellRank state transition analysis,  TREM2 +  macrophages
were closely aligned to the self-renewing macrophage population ( Fig. 5C  and  fig. S8E ). YS
 TREM2 +  macrophages were located adjacent to the
mesothelium, in a region enriched by EC ( fig. S8F ). CellPhoneDB predicted interactions between
 TREM2 +  macrophages and
 VWF +  EC, via  CXCL8  and
 NRP1 , both of which are involved in angiogenic pathways ( 45 ,  46 )
( Fig. 5F  and  data S28 ).
 TREM2 +  macrophages also expressed the purinergic
receptor  P2RY12 , which supports trafficking towards
ATP/ADP-expressing ECs, as reported in the mouse CNS ( 47 ), ( 48 ) ( Fig. 5E  and  data S31 ). To establish
whether  TREM2 +  macrophages are present in other fetal
tissues, we assembled an integrated 12-organ developmental atlas ( fig. S8G ). We resolved six
macrophage fractions based on harmonized cross-tissue definitions from our recent
prenatal immune analysis (by label transfer): pre-macrophages and TREM2 + 
macrophages (as in our cluster-driven annotations), as well as LYVE1 hi ,
Kupffer-like, iron-recycling, and proliferating macrophages ( 49 ) ( fig.
S8 ,  C  and  G  to  J , and  data S5 to S7 and S17 ). TREM2
is implicated in lipid sensing by anti-inflammatory tissue macrophages in the adult
human and mouse ( 23 – 25 ), but we observed the highest expression of
 TREM2  in macrophages bearing a “microglia-like”
signature in developing tissues including YS, skin (as previously reported ( 49 )), gonads (as previously reported ( 50 )), brain, and AGM, but not BM, liver,
kidney, thymus, mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs), or gut ( fig. S8, I and J , and  data S31 ). Next, we asked whether transcriptional features of pre-AGM macrophages could
be used to evaluate YS macrophage contribution to developing tissues. In our
12-organ macrophage dataset, pre-AGM macrophages were compared against post-AGM
macrophages in an integrated variational-autoencoder (VAE) latent space using a
Bayesian differential expression approach. The most predictive pre-AGM macrophage
features comprised nine genes, including five genes in common with a
“TLF +  signature” identified from cross-tissue analysis
of mouse macrophages ( LYVE1, TIMD4, FOLR2, MRC1 , and
 NINJ1 ) ( 51 ) ( fig. S9A  and  data S17 ). By KDE,
macrophages significantly enriched in our pre-AGM module colocalized with
LYVE1 hi  macrophages from gonads, liver, skin, and AGM, and with all
macrophage fractions from the YS ( fig. S9, B to D ;  fig.
S8H ; and  data S7 
and  S32 ). The proportion of
pre-AGM module-enriched macrophages trended downwards over time, even in the brain
( fig. S9E ). By
transcriptome alone, it was not possible to separate dilution by influx of non-YS
macrophages from transcriptional adaptation to the tissue environment. With this
caveat, we assembled a 20-organ, cross-tissue integrated landscape of adult tissue
macrophages using publicly available single-cell data from the Human Cell Atlas and
Tabula sapiens ( fig. S9, F to
H ; and  data S6, S7,
S14, and S17 ). Fat, vasculature, muscle, brain, and bladder had the
highest proportion of macrophages enriched in the pre-AGM signature ( fig. S9H and data S7 ). We integrated our YS gene expression data with scRNA-seq data from
iPSC-derived macrophage differentiation (n=19; k=50,512) ( 20 ) after refining the annotations of iPSC-derived cell-states
( fig. S10 ,  A  to  C ; and  data S5  and  13 ). Non-adherent,
 CD14 -expressing cells appearing after week 2 of differentiation
expressed  C1QA, C1QB , and  APOC1  in keeping with a
macrophage identity, while C D14, CD52, FCN1 , and
 S100A8/9 -expressing monocytes only emerged after week 3 ( fig. S10, D and E ). Prior to
monocyte emergence, a monocyte-independent macrophage differentiation trajectory was
observed, consistent with previous observations ( 20 ) ( Fig. 5G  and  fig. S10C ). TF regulatory
profiles of iPSC-derived macrophage differentiation were consistent with the both
pre-macrophage and monocyte-dependent TF profiles inferred from our YS data,
including usage of  MEF2C, SPI1, CEBPA , and  IRF8  in
iPSC-derived pre-macrophages ( Fig. 5H  and  data 30 ). However, neither
iPSC culture system could recapitulate the heterogeneity of macrophages seen in
native tissues ( fig. S10E ),
suggesting that interactions with stromal cells, such as ECs, may be required to
acquire specific molecular profiles. Discussion Using single-cell multiomic and imaging technologies, we delineate the
dynamic composition and functions of human YS in vivo from 3 PCW, when the three
embryonic germ layers form, to 8 PCW when the majority of organ structures are
already established ( 21 ). Although the
scarcity and small sample size necessitated a primarily computational approach, we
deliver a comprehensive resource. LR and VAE models provided by our data will
facilitate future use of our YS atlas to map scRNA-seq datasets ( 52 ,  53 ),
empowering future mechanistic perturbation and lineage-tracing experiments in iPSCs
and model systems. We detail how YS endoderm shares metabolic, biosynthetic, and
erythropoiesis-stimulating functions with the liver. In part, this shared
functionality may relate to their common role in creating a hematopoietic niche
( 54 ). We identify differences in the
handover from YS to liver hematopoiesis between species. In mice, erythroid
progenitors in the YS mature prior to the onset of circulation, but erythromyeloid
progenitors can exit the YS and mature in the fetal liver, giving rise to long-lived
populations such as fetal liver monocyte-derived macrophages. We show that in human
YS, active differentiation of erythroid and macrophage cells occurs for several
weeks prior to liver handover, and, at least in terms of erythropoiesis, there is a
rapid transition from YS erythroid production to embryonic liver erythroid
production shortly after AGM-derived HSPCs emerge. In a landmark study on human Hb
switching, directly-labeled 6 PCW liver and YS erythrocytes contained embryonic Hb
subunits (ε and ζ), but colonies derived from liver and YS progenitors
at this time produced fetal Hb subunits (α and γ) ( 8 ). This is in keeping with YS-derived
erythrocytes recirculating throughout the embryo and membranes while a post-AGM
progenitor is preparing for liver erythropoiesis. Direct evidence that human liver
erythropoiesis is supplied predominantly from AGM-derived HSPCs rather than a
YS-derived “EMP-like” progenitor is still lacking. Future studies are
also needed to examine the handover of macrophage production from early to
definitive sources in humans, which may question the primacy of mouse models of
early myelopoiesis. A more expansive species reference, including rabbits with their
greater early gestational similarity to humans, will facilitate selection of
appropriate models for genetic manipulation and functional validation ( 55 ). The developmental window investigated here encompasses hematopoiesis from
HSPCs arising both within the YS and within the embryo proper. We reconstructed YS
HSPC emergence from a temporally restricted HE, featuring similar transition states
and molecular regulation to AGM HSPCs. By gastrulation (CS7; 2-3 PCW), YS HSPCs
already differentiate into erythroid, MK, and myeloid lineages. Building on a recent
compilation of gene scorecards that characterize early and definitive HSPCs ( 12 ), we were able to parse the two fractions
and document transition to definitive HSPC-dominance after CS14 (˜5 PCW).
This separation also allowed us to identify an early HSPC bias towards myeloid,
erythroid, and MK lineages and a definitive HSPCs bias towards MK and lymphoid
lineages. Both early and definitive YS HSPCs became more quiescent and upregulated
apoptosis-related genes between CS17 and CS23 (˜6-8 PCW). Stromal cell
ligands predicted to support HSPCs were markedly disrupted during this time,
suggesting that the barriers to YS HSPC survival may be extrinsic. Early HSPCs uniquely employ an accelerated route to macrophage production
independent of monocytes. Both “accelerated” and monocyte-dependent
macrophages were recapitulated during in vitro differentiation of iPSCs, but diverse
macrophage subtypes such as  TREM2 +  macrophages were not.
 TREM2 +  macrophages, which are transcriptionally
aligned with brain microglia, fetal skin, testes, and AGM
 TREM2 +  macrophages, were predicted to interact with
endothelial cells, potentially supporting angiogenesis as described in mouse brain
( 56 ). There is a growing appreciation of the potentially life-long consequences of
early developmental processes. Our study illuminates a previously obscure phase of
human development, where vital organismal functions are delivered by a transient
extraembryonic organ employing non-canonical cellular differentiation pathways that
can be leveraged for tissue engineering and cellular therapy. Materials and Methods Ethics and sample acquisition Tissues were obtained from the MRC–Wellcome Trust-funded Human
Developmental Biology Resource (HDBR;  http://www.hdbr.org ) with
appropriate written consent and approval from the Newcastle and North Tyneside
NHS Health Authority Joint Ethics Committee (18/NE/0290). HDBR is regulated by
the UK Human Tissue Authority (HTA;  www.hta.gov.uk ) and operates
in accordance with the relevant HTA Codes of Practice. Tissues used for
light-sheet fluorescence microscopy were obtained through INSERM’s HuDeCA
Biobank and made available in accordance with the French bylaw (Good practice
concerning the conservation, transformation and transportation of human tissue
to be used therapeutically, published on December 29, 1998). Permission to use
human tissues was obtained from the French agency for biomedical research
(Agence de la Biomédecine, Saint-Denis La Plaine, France). Embryos were staged using the Carnegie staging method ( 57 ). A piece of skin or chorionic villi
tissue was collected from each sample to perform quantitative PCR karyotyping of
sex chromosomes and autosomal chromosomes 13, 15, 16, 18, 21, and 22 for the
most commonly seen chromosomal abnormalities. No abnormalities were
detected. Processing samples for imaging and single-cell sequencing Tissues were transported in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) on ice, were
dissected within 24 hours, and were processed immediately (<1 hour after
dissection). For formalin-fixation and paraffin-embedding, samples were
immediately placed in 10% (w/v) formalin. Processing and embedding were
performed by NovoPath, Newcastle upon Tyne NHS Trust. For RNAscope, samples were
snap-frozen in an isopentane bath in liquid nitrogen prior to embedding in
optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound. Single-cell suspensions were
generated by dicing tissue into segments <1 mm 3 , followed by
enzymatic digestion for 30 min at 37°C with intermittent shaking.
Digestion media was 1.6 mg/ml collagenase type IV (Worthington) in RPMI
(Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% (v/v) heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum
(FBS; Gibco), 100 U/ml of penicillin (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1 mg/ml of streptomycin
(Sigma-Aldrich), and 2 mM L-glutamine (Sigma-Aldrich). Digested tissue was
passed through a 100-μm filter, and cells were collected by
centrifugation (500 g  for 5 min at 4°C). Cells were
treated with 1X RBC lysis buffer (eBioscience) for 5 min at room temperature and
washed once with Flow Buffer (PBS containing 5% (v/v) FBS and 2 mM EDTA) before
counting. Processing for scRNA-seq was continued promptly on fresh cells, for
other uses (including CITE-seq) cells were collected by centrifugation
(500 g  for 5 min at 4°C) and resuspended in 10% (v/v)
DMSO in FBS for freezing. For light-sheet fluorescence microscopy (LSFM),
tissues were fixed in 4% PFA and dissected. Gestational age was then estimated
as previously described ( 58 ). Processing of single-cell suspensions for scRNA-seq Immediately following isolation and counting, cells were collected by
centrifugation (500g for 5 min at 4°C) and resuspended in a residual
buffer. Three microliters of CD45 BUV395 (clone: HI30, BD Biosciences) was added
to the resuspended cells and incubated on ice in the dark for 30 min, washed
with Flow Buffer and resuspended at ˜1×10 7  cells/ml.
Immediately prior to sorting, cells were passed through a 35-µm filter
(Falcon) and DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich) was added at a final concentration of 3
μM. Flow sorting was performed on a BD FACSAria Fusion instrument using
DIVA v.8, and data were analyzed using FlowJo (v.10.4.1, BD Biosciences). Cells
were gated to exclude dead cells and doublets, and then isolated for scRNA-seq
analysis (droplet-based 10x Genomics, or plate-based Smart-seq2) using a
100-µm nozzle. For droplet-based scRNA-seq, CD45 +  and
CD45 −  cells were sorted into separate chilled
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) tubes coated with FBS and prefilled
with 500 µl of sterile PBS. For plate-based scRNA-seq,
CD45 − AF + SSC ++  single cells were
index-sorted into 96-well LoBind plates (Eppendorf) containing 10 µl of
lysis buffer (TCL (Qiagen) + 1% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol) per well. Library preparation and sequencing of scRNA-seq and CITE-seq samples For the droplet-based scRNA-seq experiments, cell suspensions isolated
by FACS were counted and loaded onto the 10X Genomics Chromium Controller to
achieve a maximum yield of 10,000 cells per reaction. 5‏ V1 kits were
used and sequencing libraries were generated according to the
manufacturer’s protocols. Libraries were sequenced using either an
Illumina HiSeq 4000 or NovaSeq 6000 to generate at least 50,000 raw reads per
cell. For the plate-based scRNA-seq experiments, the frozen cell lysates were
thawed on ice for 1 min. Purified cDNA was generated and amplified using a
modified Smart-seq 2 protocol described in Villani et al ( 59 ). Sequencing libraries were then generated using
Illumina Nextera XT kits with v2 index sets A, B, C and D. 384 cells were pooled
and were sequenced using a HiSeq 4000 to generate at least
1×10 6  raw reads per cell. For the CITE-seq experiments, frozen cells were thawed, counted, and
pooled. Fc blocking reagent (Biolegend) was added to the cell pools and left to
incubate at room temperature for 10 min. Five hundred nanoliters of CD34
APC/Cy-7 (clone: 581, Biolegend) was then added to the Fc-blocked cells and left
to incubate in the dark and on ice for 10 min. During this incubation, the
CITE-seq antibody cocktail (Biolegend) (see  data S33 ) was centrifuged
at 14,000 g  for 1 min. Flow buffer was then added to
reconstitute before incubating for 5 min at room temperature. The resuspended
antibody cocktail was then centrifuged at 14,000 g  for a further
10 min before adding to the cells. The cells and CITE-seq antibody cocktail were
then left to incubate for 30 min in the dark and on ice. After this time, the
cells were washed twice with Flow buffer and resuspended in a final
concentration of 50 μg/ml of 7 AAD (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in
Flow buffer. Live, single cells or live, single CD34 −  cells and
live, single CD34 +  cells (for the CITE-seq experiments) were then
isolated by FACS into 500 µl of PBS in FACS tubes coated with FBS. Cells
were then counted and submitted to the CRUK CI Genomics Core Facility for
subsequent processing using 10x Genomics protocols and sequencing. Single-cell
gene expression and cell surface protein libraries were generated using Single
cell 3‏ v3 kits according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Libraries were sequenced using a NovaSeq 6000 to achieve a minimum of 20,000
reads per cell for gene expression and 5000 reads per cell for cell-surface
protein. Alignment, quality control, filtering, and preprocessing of scRNA-seq and
CITE-seq data scRNA-seq expression data (including droplet-based and plate-based) were
mapped with CellRanger (version 3.0.2) to a human reference genome (see  data S1 ) and low-quality
cells expressing <2000 reads, <200 genes, and >20%
mitochondrial reads were filtered out of the data. Data on genes expressed in
fewer than three cells was removed. For droplet-based scRNA-seq data, the following additional QC steps were
performed. Scrublet ( 60 ) v0.2.3 was
applied to each sequencing lane for doublet detection, and clusters with
>(Median+(1.48*MAD)) (MAD: Median absolute deviation) of the median
cluster doublet detection score were removed ( data S3 ). Ambient RNA was
removed with Cellbender (v0.2.0) with fdr=0.01 and epochs=150 ( 61 ). To determine likelihood of maternal
contamination, data were pooled by donor and submitted to Souporcell (v2.4.0) at
genotype clusters k=1 and k=2 models to represent likelihood of no maternal
contamination and possible maternal contamination, respectively. The optimal
model was identified via BIC (Bayesian Information Criterion), where we observed
a smaller BIC index at k=2 in one donor (F37, Female, 5 post conception weeks
(PCW)). Cells from the F37 alternate genotype were identified as potential
maternal contaminants, composed mainly of monocytes (n=149), and
monocyte–macrophage intermediates (mono–mac int.) (n=25), and
excluded from downstream analysis. For CITE-seq data, FASTQ alignment was performed for multiplexed RNA
lanes with CellRanger (v4.0.0) and GRCh38-2020-A reference genome, and for
multiplexed protein lanes with CITE-seq-Count (v1.4.3). Lanes with cells pooled
from multiple donors were deconvoluted using Souporcell singularity image at
 https://github.com/wheaton5/souporcell . Low quality cells
expressing <200 genes and >20% mitochondrial reads were removed
and doublets were removed by applying Scrublet v0.2.3 to each sequencing lane
and then removing clusters with >(Median+(1.48*MAD)) of the median
cluster doublet detection score. CITE-seq protein data underwent QC and
preprocessing as previously described ( 35 ), (i.e., cells were first filtered to intersect barcodes with
counterpart CITE-seq RNA data, then unmapped antibodies were filtered out and
then protein cells were filtered for low quality by cells with <30
proteins and expressing >5000 reads) ( data S4 ,  S19 , and  S22 ). scRNA-seq count matrix transformation, normalization, and preprocessing
were performed using Scanpy ( 62 ) (v1.9.0)
in python (v3.8.6). We normalized raw gene counts using the
 sc.pp.normalize_total  function ( target_sum 
=  10e4 ) from and performed  ln(x)+1 
transformation. Reported expression values were normalized, log-transformed, and
scaled to variance of mean using the  sc.pp.scale  function
independently for each analysis. For CITE-seq data count matrix transformation, we first performed
denoised and scaled by background (DSB)-normalization and applied a Gaussian
Mixture Model (GMM) for background non-specific binding signal regression per
sample as previously described ( 63 ). For
the first step, a modified DSB-normalization approach used in our previous study
( 35 ) was constructed. For each
CITE-seq lane, low quality/empty droplets were identified as droplets under the
largest UMI peak which had a value <1.96*standard deviations (std) of the
mean UMI counts value (mu_UMI) per sample. Peak detection was conducted using
the  scipy.signal.find_peaks  function. The number of peak
detection bins were dynamically estimated as (3.322*log(X)), where X was the
total number of droplets. The model iterated through a series of 20 prominence
intervals (0-20) with widths (0-10) where peaks detected <
(mu_UMI-(1.96*std)) were retained as empty droplet peaks. In cases where no
empty droplet peaks were detected, the empty droplet threshold was taken to be
<(mu_UMI-(1.96*std)). The estimated empty droplets matrix was then taken
into downstream DSB normalization in the same way as our previous study ( 35 ). For the second step of CITE-seq matrix
transformation, we trained a GMM to model the variance of protein expression
levels in each cell. We used the sckitlearn (v.1.1.3)
 sklearn.mixture.GaussianMixture  module to fit 20 models
with an increasing number of cell clusters  k  (between
 k =2 and  k =21) to represent expression
patterns of each protein by cell. The optimal model was identified using BIC
(BIC i  = 2L i  + kilog n ) and AIC (Akaike
information criterion) (AIC i  = 2L i  + 2k i )
metrics where  k  is the number of GMM cell protein expression
clusters, n is the number of cells in the sample and L is the model log
likelihood. The models with the best performing BIC and AIC scores were
selected. The mean expression values of GMM clusters with lowest expression values
from each GMM model were interpreted as mean background expression per protein.
Background-signal regression was then carried out using a Gaussian linear model
(GLM) per protein, constructed using the  GLM  function from
 statsmodels (v0.13.5)  on standardized, per cell background
scores (BG_score). Per-cell background scores were defined by taking the euler
number ( e ) to the power of each protein background mean
( mu_bg ), divided by  e  to the power of the
protein expression in each cell ( x ) then scaled to a
distribution between 0-1 by subtracting the minimum score and subsequently
dividing by the maximum score. Background scores inversely correlate with the
magnitude of background expression per cell. (BG_score = (score -
min( e mu_bg / e x ))/max( e mu_bg / e x )).
The per-cell background signal regressed counts were used for subsequent
analyses, interpretation and visualization. Cells comprising the empty droplet
matrix were removed and were not considered for downstream analyses. Integration and batch correction of scRNA-seq and CITE-seq datasets For integration of newly generated yolk sac (YS) scRNA-seq data with
external datasets, CellRanger count was first reapplied for the alignment of
CS10/CS11 and CS14 embryonic YS scRNA-seq data previously acquired ( 12 ,  64 ) ( data
S1 ). The following steps were then followed for the total integrated
YS droplet-based scRNA-seq dataset. Highly variable gene (HVG) selection was
performed using the  sc.pp.highly_variable_genes  function
(min_mean=0.001, max_mean=10) for embedding by dispersion. Dimensionality
reduction and batch correction for the was carried out using the scVI module
within  scvi-tools  (v0.19.0) ( 53 ) as used in scvi-tools ( 52 ) (HVG = 7500, dropout_rate=0.2, n_layer=2) with biological replicate
taken as the technical covariate. To ensure model performance was optimal for
each independent analysis, scVI was benchmarked against the python
implementation of Harmony ( 65 )
( Harmonypy  v0.0.5) at various theta values between 1 and
20. kBET ( 66 ) and Silhouette scores
( sklearn.metric.sil_score ) were computed for each iteration
between donor covariates and compared to the scVI integration. For integration
of adult scRNA-seq data, publicly available single-cell and single-nuclei
RNA-seq data of 20 healthy adult tissues ( data S6  and  S7 ) were integrated using
scVI (HVG=1500, layers=1). Batch correction was conducted on donors, single cell
or single nuclei, data source, number of genes, total counts, percentage of
mitochondrial genes and ribosomal genes. Please see  data S6  for information
regarding external single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) datasets that have
been incorporated and integrated in this study. For multimodal integration of CITE-seq datasets, we compared the
integration of both RNA and protein modalities using the
 totalVI  module in  scvi-tools  (v0.19.0)
against batch integration utilizing only the RNA modality the scVI module in
scvi-tools. We performed  sc.pp.highly_variable_genes  function
on RNA modality (HVG=4000) accounting for FACs sampling and donor technical
covariates. We then generated a multi-modal totalVI VAE latent representation
following totalVI pipeline ( 53 ). To
benchmark performance between multi-modal and single modality scRNA-seq data
integration, global silhouette distances between leiden clusters (res=3) derived
from the multi-modal totalVI VAE latent representation were compared against
clusters derived from the scVI derived VAE representation as described above
(HVG = 4000, dropout_rate=0.2, n_layer=2) ( fig. S11A ).Intersecting
cells captured between protein and RNA modalities (by barcode) were considered
in the totalVI integration ( fig. S11, B to D; and data S4  and  S22 ). All scVI VAE and ldVAE models trained on the YS and integrated atlases
are available on our data portal (see data availability) and will facilitate
transfer learning for future reference mapping of scRNA-seq data with single
cell architectural surgery (scArches) ( 18 ) Clustering and annotation of scRNA-seq and CITE-seq data Clustering of scRNA-seq and CITE-seq datasets was performed using the
Leiden algorithm ( 67 )
( sc.tl.leiden ) with a resolution parameter of
 res =1.5 (CITE-seq res=3) on a k-nearest neighborhood graph
(k=30 for scRNA-seq and k=15 for CITE-seq) unless specified otherwise. To
measure the effect of decreasing graph complexity on specific populations (YS
scRNA-seq endoderm and IPSC-derived macrophages) and global population
specificity and homogeneity in each independent analysis, the neighborhood graph
complexity parameter (k) was benchmarked at value intervals between 5 and 50.
Benchmarked metrics for population specificity included the adjusted mutual
information score (MI), and adjusted Rand index (RAND). Metrics for population
homogeneity included the silhouette index (SI) and within-cluster sum of squared
errors (WSS) ( fig. S12 ,
 A  and  B ; and  data S3  and  S7 ). In cases where
datasets are compared probabilistically, or where new classifications have been
made, an implementation of low-dimensional ElasticNet regression (EN) (described
in the “Cell state predictions using probabilistic low-dimensional
ElasticNet regression” section of the manuscript methods) was used to
first classify individual cells where a model-specific decision threshold of 0.9
was used for classification tasks. Cells classified inherited labels from the
model trained on YS scRNA-seq data. Clusters were then assigned classes if the
majority projected label had a label count distribution of >(mean +
(1*std)) of label counts per cluster. Resultant cell state classifications were
further manually checked using differentially expressed genes using the
 sc.tl.rank_genes_groups  function in Scanpy which performed
a two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test for genes expressed in >25% of cells,
with a log-transformed fold change cut-off of 0.25. All p-values were adjusted
for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg method. Annotation of
YS and liver CITE-seq data was performed by training an EN model using YS and
Embryonic Liver (EL) scRNA-seq datasets as references respectively. These labels
were then distributed by majority voting onto Leiden clusters derived from
CITE-seq data ( data S9 
and  S10 ). The resultant
cluster annotations were validated using the same markers identified in matched
RNA data and underwent additional manual annotation where required. For
differential expression testing of surface proteins in multi-modal CITE-seq
data, we conducted a one_vs_all DE test using the
 vae.differential_expression module  within totalVI (Bayes
factor>3, Median LFC>0.25). Marker proteins and corresponding
populations were subsequently subject to hierarchical grouping using the
 sc.tl.dendrogram  functionality within Scanpy ( fig. S11, B to D ; and
 data S4, S20, and
S22 ). Bayesian differential expression testing between cell states in
the integrated 12 fetal organ atlas was carried out on using a
 scVI  integrated latent VAE representation with a one_vs_all
DE test using the  vae.differential_expression module  within
scVI (v0.19.0) (Bayes factor>3, Median LFC >4). Variation of
effect-sizes on state-specific normalized counts between latent variables in the
integrated latent VAE representation were first modeled. The posterior
likelihood of differential expression was attained by repeated one_vs_all
sampling of the variational distribution. Significant features were defined with
a likelihood of differential expression (Bayes Factor) >3 and Median LFC
>4. Bayesian differential expression testing between myeloid cell states
in the integrated 20 organ adult scRNA-seq atlas was carried out as described
above ( fig. S12 C ; and
 data S6, S7, and
S17 ). Dimensionality reduction and marker expression visualization For visualization, the uniform manifold approximation (UMAP) algorithm
was run using the  sc.tl.umap  function in Scanpy. Dot-plots and
violin plots were produced in Scanpy and all gene expression values displayed
were normalized, log-transformed, and scaled as described in the preprocessing
section unless otherwise stated. Dot plots that display data from multiple
datasets employed independent log-normalization, variance scaling, and
min–max standardization to a distribution of 0-1 per dataset unless
otherwise stated. Force-directed graphs (FDGs) computed with the
 sc.tl.draw_graphs  function in Scanpy using the Force Atlas2
parameter were used to infer trajectories. Partition-based graph abstraction
(PAGA) were computed on the k-nearest neighbor graphs and overlaid onto FDGs
where nodes represented the centroid of each cell state cluster and the
thickness of edges represented the similarity between cell states ( data S5 ). Proportion line graphs for specific populations (e.g., erythroid cells)
enriched in specific genes (e.g.  HBZ ) using the
 sc.tl.enrich  function in Scanpy were produced using
Matplotlib (v3.6.2). To ensure temporal changes in population size and
background expression were accounted for, we segregated our population of
interest by age and computed changes in relative population proportion enriched
in each gene, only considering cells expressing >0 log-normalized counts
for each gene. Enriched cells were defined with >0 score of each scored
gene subtracted with the mean expression of a randomly sampled set of 200
selected reference genes at 50 bins using the aforementioned enrichment function
in  Scanpy . Proportions of enriched cells in each cell type
compartment were then plotted as a discrete time-series across gestational age
to visualize differential enrichment of cells expressing the genes of interest.
Data point sizes represented enriched cell counts. To aid interpretation, an
ordinal scale of representative cell counts was included as a legend in the
plots. Proportions of specific populations (e.g., macrophages) enriched in
specific gene modules (e.g., Pre-AGM module) were visualized using violin graphs
produced using Matplotlib and  Seaborn  (v0.12.1) python
libraries. To ensure background expression profiles were accounted for, we
segregated our population of interest and computed changes in relative
population proportion enriched in each gene module. Significant module
enrichment was defined as described above. Enriched cells from each cell type
compartment were then graphed across organs. Enrichment scores were standardized
to the median by subtraction of the median and subsequent division by MAD. Differential abundance testing and FACS correction We tested for differential cell-state abundance across gestation using
the  Milo  framework ( 68 ),
correcting for CD45 positive and negative FACS isolation strategies using a
previously published technique ( 49 ).
Where FACs correction was applied, we calculated a FACS isolation correction
factor for each sample  s  sorted with gate  i  as
( fs  = log( pi S/Si)) where
 pi  is the true proportion of cells from gate
 i  and S represents the total number of cells from both
gates. A KNN graph was then constructed from the remaining cells using the
 milopy.core.make_nhoods  function (prop=0.05). Neighborhood
labels were determined by majority voting of cell labels by frequency in each
neighborhood (>50%). The YS scRNA-seq data was then split into five age
bins (3 PCW, 4 PCW, 5 PCW, 7 PCW, and 8 PCW) and cell counts were modeled as a
negative binomial generalized linear model (NB-GLM) with
Benjamini–Hochberg weighted correction as previously described ( 49 ). Significantly differentially abundant
neighborhoods were detected by SpatialFDR–(<0.1, logFC <0)
for early enriched neighborhoods and (<0.1, logFC >0) for late
neighborhoods ( data
S24 ). Beeswarm plots were generated using the  ggplot2  library
(v3.4.2). Each node represents an independent neighborhood of cells derived from
the KNN graph. The  x -axis position of each node represents the
fold-change (positive/negative) associated with the distribution of age groups
present in each neighborhood where larger proportions of older groups in a given
neighborhood encourages a positive fold change and vice versa. Colored nodes
represent neighborhoods with significant enrichment
( P <0.05 spatial FDR) and the intensity represents the
degree of significance. Clustered gene-set enrichment analysis We ranked conserved markers ( P <0.05) between the
endoderm cell state in YS scRNA-seq data against hepatocytes in EL scRNA-seq and
endoderm in the mouse gastrulation scRNA-seq data using the
 FindConservedMarkers  function in Seurat (v3.1) with
Bonferroni corrected FDR adjusted  P -values. Markers were
submitted for gene set enrichment ranking and analysis using the Enrichr tool as
implemented in the  GSEApy  (v1.0) package to query the Gene
Ontology (GO) Biological Process database (GO_BP_2022) ( data S26 ). Using the
enrichrR package (v3.0) in R, enrichment was first computed by Fisher exact test
for randomly sampled genes to derive a mean rank and standard deviation to
estimate background for each ontological term accessed. A
 z -score for deviation of each term to its background rank was
then used to rank output genesets. We derived statistical significance (Fisher
exact test <0.05, ranked by  z -score) for each gene set
enrichment and performed Markov clustering (MCL) using the MCL (v1.0) package in
R to derive network neighborhoods based on geneset intersect. Gene set clusters
were annotated using the AutoAnnotate function in the RCy3 (v2.16) package and
clusters were ranked by the mean  z -score of all gene sets
within each cluster and manually curated based on biological significance. We
used the Cytoscape software (v3.9.1) to visualize clusters. Cell state predictions using probabilistic low-dimensional ElasticNet
regression Label transfer class assignments and median probability of class
correspondence between gene expression matrices in single cell datasets were
carried out using a logistic regression (LR) framework, as previously described
( 35 ), using a similar workflow to the
 CellTypist  tool ( 69 ). Raw scRNA-seq datasets being compared were first concatenated,
normalized, and log-transformed, as described in preprocessing. HVG selection
was performed (min_mean=0.001, max_mean=10) for embeddings by dispersion. HVG
expression matrices were used as training inputs for models unless otherwise
stated. For models trained in combined low-dimensional representations, linear
VAE latent representations were computed using the  LDVAE  module
within  scvi-tools  (hidden layers=256, dropout-rate=0.2,
reconstruction-loss=negative binomial) with donor, dataset origin, and organ
information taken as technical covariates. Where PCs were used as input for
training, harmony batch-corrected PCs (k=100pcs) were used, using Harmonypy
(v0.0.9) with technical covariates as described above. Harmony runs were
iterated through theta=1:20 and resultant embeddings benchmarked using kBET and
silhouette scores between technical covariates where a low kBET rejection rate
and corresponding high silhouette score denoted the optimal theta parameter. ElasticNet regression (EN) LR models were built utilizing the
“sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression” module in the sklearn
package (v0.22). The models were trained using either gene expression data or
SCVI batch-corrected low-dimensional LDVAE representation of the training data
with regularization parameters (L1-ratio and alpha) tuned using the GridSearchCV
function in sklearn (v1.1.3). The test grid was designed with five l1_ratio
intervals (0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1), five alpha (inverse of regularization
strength) intervals (0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1) at five train-test splits and three
repeats for cross-validation. The unweighted mean over the weighted mean squared
errors (MSEs) of each test fold (the cross-validated MSE) was used to determine
the optimal model. The resultant model was used to predict the probability of
correspondence between trained labels and precomputed clusters in the target
dataset. To ensure that probabilistic outputs from LR models remained consistent
with observed neighborhood graph connectivities, the median LR predicted
probability of training label assignment was compared against normalized graph
distances between classes computed using the partition-based graph abstraction
(PAGA) (tl.paga) module in Scanpy as described in our previous work (10) ( fig. S13A ). Genes
predicted to be significantly discriminatory for each LR model were assessed by
significance of impact. Features were ranked in descending manner by impact
score (eˆcoefficient per feature for given intercept). Impact
significance ( P <0.05) of each gene was computed by the
survival function (sf) across all gene impact scores ( fig. S13B ). To further
verify the specificity of the TREM2 macrophage gene expression profile, the
proportion of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) overlapping between the
TREM2 macrophage population and other macrophage populations across the 12-organ
fetal atlas were computed using a two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test as described
in the clustering and annotation section ( fig. S13, C and D ; and
 data S31 ). For dataset comparisons across the 12-organ fetal atlas tasks where
predesignated labels already existed in the target dataset, the median
probability of training label assignment per predesignated class was computed.
The resultant LR probabilistic relationship between labels of the 12-organ atlas
were visualized as a heatmap ( fig. S14  and  S15 ; and  data S8
to S16 ). For classification tasks, a model-specific decision threshold of 0.9 was
used to determine predicted labels. Clusters were then assigned classes if the
majority projected label had a label count distribution of >(mean +
(1*std)) of label counts per cluster. Resultant cell state classifications were
further manually checked using differentially expressed genes. Further
assessment of the predicted cluster labels was carried out by computing the
adjusted Rand index and mutual information scores from the modules
‘sklearn.metrics.adjusted_rand_score’ and
‘sklearn.metrics.mutual_info_score’ between the original cluster
labels and predicted cluster labels in each dataset. This methodology was
applied to classify and annotate several external datasets including the
scRNA-seq human gastrulation data ( 14 ),
the human AGM data ( 12 ), the human
embryonic liver data and human fetal skin data ( 49 ), as well as the human YS and liver CITE-seq data ( data S6 ). An implementation of the EN workflow described above, in conjunction
with the SAMap (Self-Assembling Manifold mapping) workflow (v1.0.7) ( 70 ), was used to classify and
probabilistically compare cell states across the human YS scRNA-seq data and the
mouse gastrulation YS data. A gene–gene sequence homology graph weighted
by human and mouse sequence similarity was first constructed using the SAMAP
tool. Reciprocal BLAST mapping using the tblastx tool between the entire mouse
and human transcriptomes for significant homology
(E-value<10 −6 ) was supplied. The resultant SAM
object returned k=300 species-stitched PC components for the top 3000 paired
genes. These PC components were used to train the cross-species EN model as a
classification task described above ( data S11 ). LR models and weights trained on the YS and integrated fetal atlases are
available via our interactive web portal in “.sav” format (see
data availability) and will facilitate future use of our YS atlas for label
transfer and and to rapidly annotate scRNA-seq datasets using the Python package
CellTypist (v.0.1.9) ( 69 ). Differential lineage priming and progenitor cell fate predictions The CellRank package (v1.5.1) was used to define and rank fate
probabilities of terminal state transitions across annotated hematopoietic
lineages in the YS and iPSC scRNA-seq datasets. In the YS data, cell clusters
broadly annotated to be in the myeloid lineage were first subsetted from the YS
data. After refinement, DCs were excluded from this subset. We did not identify
any DCs in the <CS14 (pre-agm) myeloid lineage. Macrophage trajectory
inference was then constructed across the myeloid subset ( fig. S8E ). Cells were
divided by donors aged <CS14 and >CS14 (post-agm) and trajectory
inference recomputed on new embeddings. First-order-kinetics matrices were
imputed for each dataset using the  pp.moments  function
(n_pcs=20, n_neighbours=30) in the scVelo package (v0.2.4). A Cytotrace
pseudotime for state transitions across each dataset was then computed to direct
graph-edges towards estimated neighborhood regions of increasing differentiation
using the Cytotrace kernel provided within the CellRank package. The resultant
KNN and Cytotrace pseudotime were used to compute a probability transition
matrix with the  compute _transition_matrix  command in
Cytotrace. Neighborhoods of cells representing terminal states of
differentiation were identified using true Schur matrix eigen decomposition of
the transition matrix  compute_schur  (n_components=20,
method=brandts), followed by the  compute_macrostates 
(n_states=10) command in Cytotrace. The resultant terminally differentiated cell
states were then manually selected if multiple terminal states were identified
per lineage. Fate absorption probabilities were then computed across all cells
terminating at each prespecified terminal cellstate neighborhood using the
 compute_absoprtion_probabilities  command in CellRank. Fate
probabilities were then presented as a circular plot using the
 pl.circular_projection  with embedding proximity to terminal
edges of the graph representing the fate-transition probability of a particular
cell towards the prespecified terminally differentiation state. HSPC progenitor
population density was then computed by kernel density estimation (KDE) of a
precomputed UMAP highlighting relative probabilities of HSPC lineage priming
(KDE calculated using the  tl.embedding.density  function in
Scanpy). For HSPC lineage priming analyses which included the respective
embryonic erythroid and erythroid terminal states, embryonic erythroid states
were defined as any erythroid cell with a HBZ module  z -score
> 0, and erythroid as any erythroid cell with individual module
 z -score of HBA1, HBA2, HBG1, HBG2, HBD > 0. pySCENIC for regulon analysis The pySCENIC package (v0.9.19) was used to identify transcription
factors (TFs) and their target genes in the YS and iPSC scRNA-seq datasets. The
ranking database (hg38 refseq-r80 500bp_up_and_100bp_down_tss.mc9nr.feather),
motif annotation database (motifs-v9-nr.hgncm0.001-o0.0.tbl) and list of TFs
(lambert2018.txt) were used. An adjacency matrix of TFs and their targets was
generated. TF activity from the AUcell output was modeled along diffusion
pseudotime rankings of each trajectory and used to train a nonlinear Generalized
Additive Model (nlGAM) using the pyGAM.LinearGAM model to identify TF modules
which significantly changed across each lineage pseudotime. A gridsearch of
between 50 and 200 splines were calculated. Significantly changing TF regulons
across pseudotime were classified with a  P <0.05 and
reported in  Fig. 5, D and H , and  data S30 ). Regulon matrix
heatmaps were plotted using the  Seaborn  (v0.12.1) package in
Python. Regulon scores were variance-scaled and min–max-standardized with
a distribution of 0-1. Cell-cell interaction predictions using CellPhoneDB To assign putative cell–cell interactions within the YS scRNA-seq
dataset, we used CellPhoneDB (v2.1.2). Log-transformed, normalized, and scaled
gene expression values for all cell states were exported. CellPhoneDB was run
using the statistical method using the receptor-ligand database (v2.0.0) with a
significance  P -cut-off of 0.05 ( data S28 to S29 ). Outputs
were ranked by log-mean expression for interactions between cell types of
interest in each analyses and plotted as a  z -scored heatmap to
show standard deviations from mean for each receptor–ligand pair. Hiplex RNAscope Human YS tissue (8 PCW) was frozen in OCT compound (Tissue-Tek). 12-plex
smFISH was performed using the RNAscope HiPlex v2 assay (ACD, Bio-Techne) on
three cryosections (10 µm) per manufacturer’s instructions, using
the standard pretreatment for freshly frozen samples and permeabilized with
Protease III, for 15 min at room temperature. The imaging cycles, primary probes
and label fluorophores were:  Cycle1_KLRB1_AlexaFluor488,
Cycle1_CD1C_Dylight550, Cycle1_IL7R_Dylight650, Cycle1_SPINK2_AlexaFluor750,
Cycle2_P2RY12_AlexaFluor488, Cycle2_TNFA_Dylight550,
Cycle2_LGALS3_Dylight650, Cycle2_IL33_AlexaFluor750,
Cycle3_PLVAP_AlexaFluor488, Cycle3_SPINK1_Dylight550,
Cycle3_C1QA_Dylight650, Cycle3_ACTA2_AlexaFluor750, Cycle4_P2RY12_Opal570
and Cycle4_IBA1_Cy5.  Slides were counterstained with DAPI and
coverslipped for imaging. For protein validation, slides were fixed with 4% (w/v) paraformaldehyde
(PFA) for 60 min at room temperature and then washed and dehydrated in an
ethanol gradient (50 to 100%) for 5 min each. Sections were treated with
Protease III (ACD, Bio-Techne) for 15 min at room temperature, then washed with
PBS prior to blocking in 10% (v/v) normal donkey serum containing 1% (w/v)
Triton X-100 and 0.2% (w/v) gelatin for 60 min at room temperature. Primary
antibodies were incubated at 4°C overnight, then washed three times for
20 min each with a wash buffer (0.1% (w/v) Triton X-100 in PBS). Slides were
blocked with HRP Block (ACD, Bio-Techne) for 60 min at room temperature, and
washed with ACD Wash Buffer (ACD, Bio-Techne) prior to addition of secondary
antibody and incubation for 60 min at room temperature. Slides were washed three
times for 20 min each (0.1% (w/v) Triton X-100 in PBS). TSA-Opal570 was added
for 10 min at room temperature, then washed three times with ACD Wash Buffer.
Slides were counterstained with DAPI and coverslipped for imaging. Imaging was performed on a custom two-camera spinning disk confocal
microscope built around a Crest Optics X-light v3 module by Cairn Research, a
scientific equipment manufacturer. The instrument was controlled using the
Micro-Manager software ( 71 ). All imaging
was performed in spinning disk confocal mode with a 40X water immersion
objective (NA 1.15, 180nm/pixel) and 1.5-µm  z -step using
Prime BSI Express (Teledyne Photometrics) camera. RNAscope image analysis Before each imaging experiment, a slide covered in a sparse layer of
0.5-µm Tetraspeck beads was imaged in all channels. The bead images in
all channels were then registered against the beads in the DAPI channel and
their respective affine transforms were saved. After imaging, each individual tile was  z -projected
with a maximum intensity projection, then the channels were transformed using
the saved affine transforms. The projected, transformed tiles were saved back to
a temporary directory along with a bigstitcher-compatible XML file. The
BigStitcher software ( 72 ) was then used
to stitch the transformed tiles together and the final stitched image exported
for further analysis. All imaging cycles for a given tissue section were registered in two
steps. First, we used feature registration algorithm implemented in Python via
OpenCV-contrib library (version 4.3.0) ( 73 ) to compute an affine transformation of DAPI channel from cycle
r>1 (moving image) with respect to DAPI channel from the first cycle r=1
(reference image). Key points were detected using the FAST feature detector,
whose surrounding areas were described using the DAISY feature descriptor, while
the FLANN-based matcher was used to find correspondences between pairs of key
points from reference and moving images and filter out unreliable points. The
remaining key points were processed using the RANSAC-based algorithm that aligns
them and estimates affine transformation parameters with four degrees of
freedom. For the second registration step, a nonlinear registration algorithm
based on Farneback optical-flow available in Python via OpenCV library was used
to achieve more accurate registration by warping images locally. Specifically,
local warping was computed using the DAPI channel, from cycle r>1 with
respect to the corresponding channel of the first round. The computational
pipeline implementing these registration steps was optimized so that it could be
performed efficiently on large images. The corresponding code for feature
registration is available at github.com/BayraktarLab/feature_reg, while the code
for optical-flow registration at github.com/BayraktarLab/opt_flow_reg. Immunohistochemistry Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded blocks of YS 4-8 PCW, embryonic liver
7-8 PCW, and healthy adult liver were sectioned at 4-µm thickness onto
slides coated with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APES). For hematoxylin and eosin staining, slides were dewaxed in xylene and
rehydrated through graded ethanol, as previously described ( 10 ). Rehydrated slides were incubated for 5
min in Mayer’s hematoxylin (Dako, Agilent), rinsed in tap water and then
differentiated for 2 s in acid alcohol before washing in tap water followed by
Scott’s tap water substitute (Leica Biosystems). Sections were
counterstained in triple eosin (Dako, Agilent) for 5 min before being rinsed in
tap water, dehydrated through graded ethanol (70% to 99%), and then placed in
xylene before mounting with DPX (Dako, Agilent). For immunohistochemistry (IHC), dewaxing, rehydration, and staining was
performed using the Discovery Ultra auto Stainer and kits (Ventana, Roche)
following the manufacturer’s protocols. Primary and secondary antibodies
and their concentrations are listed in  data S23 . Slides were counterstained with one drop of
hematoxylin II (Ventana, Roche) for 8 min, rinsed with Reaction Buffer and one
drop of Bluing reagent (Dako, Agilent) added for 4 min. The slide was then
rinsed with a Reaction buffer, before being dehydrated by hand through graded
ethanol (70% to 99%), placed in xylene and mounted with DPX (Dako, Agilent). Rabbit polyclonal anti-human alpha-1-fetoprotein (AFP; Agilent) staining
was performed by NovoPath, Newcastle upon Tyne NHS Trust, using a proprietary
method. For the Martius Scarlet eBlue (MSB) stain, slides were dewaxed in xylene
and rehydrated through graded ethanol as previously published ( 10 ). Rehydrated slides were placed in
Bouins’ fixative (Atom Scientific) for 1 hour at 60°C, washed in
running water, incubated in Weigert’s solution (Atom Scientific) for 10
min and washed in water. Slides were differentiated in 0.9% ethanol for 1-2 s
before rinsing in tap water followed by Scott’s tap water substitute
(Leica Biosystems), distilled water and finally 95% ethanol. Slides were then
incubated stepwise in Martius yellow (3 min) (Atom Scientific), Brilliant
crystal scarlet (6 min) (Atom Scientific), and 50% (v/v) Methyl blue (2 min)
(Atom Scientific), washing with distilled water between each stain. Slides were
washed in tap water, rapidly dehydrated (2-3 min) through graded ethanol (70 to
99%), then placed in xylene before mounting with DPX mountant (Dako,
Agilent). All slides were imaged at 20X magnification on a NanoZoomer S360
(Hamamatsu) digital slide scanner. MSB stained images were deconvolved into
respective Martius yellow, crystal scarlet and methyl blue channels using the
Colour Deconvolution plugin (v1.8) (Masson Trichrome) in FIJI with thresholds
set using the Otsu method. Pseudocolors for each deconvolved channel were then
assigned as in  Fig. 2C . ASGR1 and CD34 immunofluorescence microscopy YS sections were baked onto slides for 2 hours at 60°C before
being dewaxed in xylene and rehydrated through graded ethanol as previously
described ( 10 ). Slides were washed with
distilled water then placed in a pressure cooker with boiling citrate buffer pH
6 (10 mM citric acid (Sigma), 0.05% v/v Tween 20 (Sigma) in DI water) for 2 min
for antigen retrieval. Slides were then washed for 3 min with distilled water
followed by 3 min in PBS (Sigma). Sections were blocked with 20% (v/v) goat
serum (R&D Systems) for 45 min at room temperature. Primary antibodies
were diluted in blocking solution ( data S23 ), added to the sections and incubated for 1 hour
at room temperature. Slides were washed twice for 3 min each in a wash buffer
(0.1% (w/v) Triton X (Sigma) in PBS), then twice for 3 min each in PBS.
Secondary antibodies (see  data
S23 ) were diluted in blocking solution, added to section and
incubated for 2 hours at room temperature. The wash step was repeated and then
300 nM DAPI (Sigma) was added. Slides were incubated for 5 min before washing
with PBS. Slides were then mounted with ProLong™ Diamond Antifade
(Thermofisher) and imaged on a Zeiss Axioimager with Zeiss ZEN pro software. SMA and LYVE1/CD34 immunofluorescence microscopy PFA-fixed YS was cryoprotected with sucrose 10%, embedded in
gelatin-sucrose solution (7.5% x/v gelatin (VWR 24350.262), 10% w/v sucrose
(VWR27478.296), in 0.12M PBS), frozen at -50°C, then sectioned at
14µm. Slides were stored at -80°C until use, dried for 30 min,
then blocked with PBS Gelatin Triton (0.2% w/v gelatin, 0.25% Triton X-100
(Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS) for 1 hour. Primary antibodies were diluted in blocking
solution ( data S23 ),
added to the sections, and incubated overnight. Slides washed with PBS three
times at 10-min intervals. Secondary antibodies were diluted in blocking
solution and added to sections to incubate for 2 hours ( data S23 ). Hoechst 33258
(Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the secondary antibody solution. Sections were
washed with PBS three times at 10-min intervals, and coverslips were mounted
with Mowiol (Calbiochem). Sections were imaged at 20X magnification on Leica
DM6000 widefield microscope with MetaMorph software. Brightness and contrast
were adjusted and a scale bar was added with FIJI ( 74 ). Light-sheet fluorescence microscopy Candidate antibodies were screened by immunofluorescence on cryosections
obtained from OCT-embedded specimens as previously described ( 10 ,  58 ). Routine light-sheet immunofluorescence microscopy (LSFM) was
then performed on floating whole-mount yolk sacs as previously described, with
primary antibody incubation reduced to 10 days and secondary reduced to 2 days,
both at 37°C to preserve tissue integrity. Antibody and other reagents
including nuclear marker TO-PRO-3 iodide are specified in  data S23 . Yolk sacs were
embedded in 1.5% agarose blocks prior to solvent-based clearing as previously
described ( 58 ). YS retained its spherical
shape throughout the procedure. Imaging was performed as previously described in
dibenzyl ether with a Miltenyi Biotec Ultramicroscope Blaze (sCMOS camera 5.5MP
controlled by Inspector Pro 7.3.2 acquisition software), which generates light
sheets at excitation wavelengths of 488, 561, 640, and 785 nm. Objective lenses
of 4X magnification (MI Plan 4X NA0.35) and 12X magnification (MI Plan NA 0.53)
were used. Imaris (v9.8, BitPlane) was used for image conversion, processing,
and video production. Blender 3.0 was used to edit videos and add text. All raw
image data are available on request (A.C. and M.H.). Statistics and reproducibility The number of cells from each cell type in each de novo single cell
dataset provided in this manuscript are provided in  data S4 . Supplementary Material Table S1 Table S2 Table S3 Table S4 Table S5 Table S6 Table S7 Table S8 Table S9 Table S10 Table S11 Table S12 Table S13 Table S14 Table S15 Table S16 Table S17 Table S18 Table S19 Table S20 Table S21 Table S22 Table S23 Table S24 Table S25 Table S26 Table S27 Table S28 Table S29 Table S30 Table S31 Table S32 Table S33 MDAR Reproducibility Checklist Movie S1 Movie S2 Supplementary Materials Acknowledgements We thank T. Dhanaseelan of HDBR for assistance with human fetal tissue processing and
cell freezing, N. Elliott for contributions toward CITE-seq panel design, S. Fouquet
and Q. Rappeneau for technical support, and J. Haniffa for copyediting support. We
also thank the Newcastle University Flow Cytometry Core Facility, Newcastle
University Genomics Facility, Sanger Institute Cellular Genetics IT, CRUK CI
Genomics Core Facility, and Newcastle upon Tyne NHS Trust NovoPath. We are grateful
to the donors and donor families for granting access to the tissue samples. This
publication is part of the Human Cell Atlas ( www.humancellatlas.org/publications ). Funding We acknowledge funding from the Wellcome Human Cell Atlas Strategic Science
Support (WT211276/Z/18/Z), MRC Human Cell Atlas award, Wellcome Human
Developmental Biology Initiative (WT215116/Z/18/Z), and HDBR (MRC/Wellcome
MR/R006237/1). M.H. is funded by Wellcome (WT107931/Z/15/Z, WT223092/Z/21/Z,
WT206194, and WT220540/Z/20/A), The Lister Institute for Preventive Medicine and
NIHR and Newcastle Biomedical Research Centre. S.A.T. is funded by Wellcome
(WT206194) and the ERC Consolidator Grant ThDEFINE. Relevant research in the
B.G. group was funded by Wellcome (206328/Z/17/Z) and the MRC (MR/M008975/1 and
MR/S036113/1). I.R. is funded by Blood Cancer UK and by the NIHR Oxford
Biomedical Centre Research Fund. E.L. is funded by a Sir Henry Dale Fellowship
jointly funded by the Wellcome Trust and the Royal Society (107630/Z/15/A). L.J.
is funded by a Newcastle Health Innovation Partners Lectureship. M.Ma. is funded
by an Action Medical Research Fellowship (GN2779). N.M. was funded by a DFG
Research Fellowship (ME 5209/1-1). S.Be. is funded by a Wellcome Senior Research
Fellowship (10104/Z/15/Z). C.Al. is funded by the Open Targets consortium
(OTAR026 project) and Wellcome Sanger core funding (WT206194). M.I. is supported
by Wellcome (215116/Z/18/Z) and thanks the PhD program FIRE and the Graduate
School EURIP of Université Paris Cité for their financial support.
J.Pal. is funded by NIH NHLBI R01 (HL151777). J.T.H.L. is funded by the Wellcome
Trust Grant (108413/A/15/D). A.C. is funded by the Inserm cross-cutting
program HuDeCA 2018. M.dB. is funded by an MRC Molecular Haematology Unit core award
MC_UU_00029/5. B.O. is funded by a Wellcome 4Ward North Clinical Training
Fellowship. Author contributions:  Conceptualization: M.H., S.A.T., and
B.G. Funding acquisition: M.H., S.A.T., and B.G. Supervision: M.H. and L.J. Data
curation: I.G., A.R., S.W., M.Ma., M.Q.L., N.K.W., D.H., and D.B.L. Formal
analysis: I.G., A.R., K.G., S.W., I.I.R., M.Q.L., D.M.P, K.P., J.Par., S.v.D.,
J.T.H.L., M.L.T., D.K., L.Y., and N.K.W. Software: D.H. and D.B.L.
Investigation: R.A.B., S.L., D.J.H., J.E., E.S., I.G., N.K.W., N.J.C, N.M.,
R.H., M.S.V., Y.G., M.I., D.D., M.A., R.C., T.N., K.K., E.T., S.J.K., and V.L.
Methodology: R.A.B., E.S., O.B., K.K., N.J.C., V.R., M.I., Y.G. Resources:
C.Al., R.V.T., S.Ba., P.M., L.G., K.M., S.Be., E.L., A.C., I.R., M.d.B., E.D.,
C.S., and J.M. Writing - original draft: L.J., S.W., I.G., M.H., R.A.B., B.O.,
M.Mi., and E.S. Writing - review and editing: L.J., I.G., S.W., E.S., M.H.,
A.R., J.E., R.A.B., B.G., M.M., and J.Pal. Visualization: J.E., R.A.B., L.J.,
C.Ad., I.G., A.R., M.L.T., and S.W. Competing interests:  J.M. is an employee of Genentech. The
remaining authors declare no competing interests. Data and materials availability All novel raw sequencing data from this study are made publicly available at
ArrayExpress as FASTQs and count matrices as follows: (i) Human embryonic liver and
yolk sac 10X scRNA-seq ( 82 ); (ii) Human
embryonic yolk sac 10X scRNA-seq ( 83 ); (iii)
Human embryonic yolk sac Smart-seq2 scRNA-seq ( 84 ); (iv) Human embryonic yolk sac CITE-seq ( 85 ); (v) Human embryonic liver CITE-seq ( 86 ); (vi) Human fetal liver CITE-seq ( 87 ). Accessions for published data reused in this study are
detailed comprehensively in  data
S6 . Processed single-cell datasets are available for interactive
exploration and download as well as corresponding trained scVI and logistic
regression models via our interactive web portal ( https://developmental.cellatlas.io/yolk-sac ). Of note, data on
portals are best used for rapid visualization. For formal analysis and all code for
reproducibility including trained scVI VAE, ldVAE and trained logistic regression
models, we recommended following our archived code available on Github ( 88 ) and our interactive web portal. All raw and
processed imaging data are available on the EBI Bioimaging archive ( 89 ). Processed imaging data are available on
our interactive web portal. For the purpose of Open Access, the author has applied a
CC-BY public copyright license to any author-accepted version of this manuscript
arising from this submission. 1 Ross C Boroviak TE Origin and function of the yolk sac in primate
embryogenesis Nat Commun 2020 11 3760 32724077 10.1038/s41467-020-17575-w PMC7387521 2 Cindrova-Davies T Jauniaux E Elliot MG Gong S Burton GJ Charnock-Jones DS RNA-seq reveals conservation of function among the yolk sacs of
human, mouse, and chicken Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2017 114 E4753 E4761 28559354 10.1073/pnas.1702560114 PMC5474779 3 Yamane T Mouse Yolk Sac Hematopoiesis Front Cell Dev Biol 2018 0 10.3389/fcell.2018.00080 PMC6062755 30079337 4 Palis J Malik J Mcgrath KE Kingsley PD Primitive erythropoiesis in the mammalian embryo The International Journal of Developmental Biology 2010 54 1011 1018 20711979 10.1387/ijdb.093056jp 5 Canu G Ruhrberg C First blood: the endothelial origins of hematopoietic
progenitors Angiogenesis 2021 24 199 211 33783643 10.1007/s10456-021-09783-9 PMC8205888 6 Medvinsky AL Samoylina NL Müller AM Dzierzak EA An early pre-liver intraembryonic source of CFU-S in the
developing mouse Nature 1993 364 64 67 8316298 10.1038/364064a0 7 Tavian M Hallais MF Péault B Emergence of intraembryonic hematopoietic precursors in the
pre-liver human embryo Development 1999 126 793 803 9895326 10.1242/dev.126.4.793 8 Peschle C Migliaccio AR Migliaccio G Petrini M Calandrini M Russo G Mastroberardino G Presta M Gianni AM Comi P Embryonic----Fetal Hb switch in humans: studies on erythroid
bursts generated by embryonic progenitors from yolk sac and
liver Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1984 81 2416 2420 6201856 10.1073/pnas.81.8.2416 PMC345071 9 Bian Z Gong Y Huang T Lee CZW Bian L Bai Z Shi H Zeng Y Liu C He J Zhou J Deciphering human macrophage development at single-cell
resolution Nature 2020 582 571 576 32499656 10.1038/s41586-020-2316-7 10 Popescu D-M Botting RA Stephenson E Green K Webb S Jardine L Calderbank EF Polanski K Goh I Efremova M Acres M Decoding human fetal liver haematopoiesis Nature 2019 574 365 371 31597962 10.1038/s41586-019-1652-y PMC6861135 11 Ivanovs A Rybtsov S Welch L Anderson RA Turner ML Medvinsky A Highly potent human hematopoietic stem cells first emerge in the
intraembryonic aorta-gonad-mesonephros region J Exp Med 2011 208 2417 2427 22042975 10.1084/jem.20111688 PMC3256972 12 Calvanese V Capellera-Garcia S Ma F Fares I Liebscher S Ng ES Ekstrand S Aguadé-Gorgorió J Vavilina A Lefaudeux D Nadel B Mapping human haematopoietic stem cells from haemogenic
endothelium to birth Nature 2022 604 534 540 35418685 10.1038/s41586-022-04571-x PMC9645817 13 Horsfall D McGrath J Adifa software for Single Cell Insights 2022 10.5281/zenodo.5824896 14 Tyser RCV Mahammadov E Nakanoh S Vallier L Scialdone A Srinivas S Single-cell transcriptomic characterization of a gastrulating
human embryo Nature 2021 600 285 289 34789876 10.1038/s41586-021-04158-y PMC7615353 15 Xue J Wu Q Westfield LA Tuley EA Lu D Zhang Q Shim K Zheng X Sadler JE Incomplete embryonic lethality and fatal neonatal hemorrhage
caused by prothrombin deficiency in mice Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998 95 7603 7607 9636196 10.1073/pnas.95.13.7603 PMC22696 16 Ruf W Yokota N Schaffner F Tissue factor in cancer progression and
angiogenesis Thrombosis Research 2010 125 S36 S38 20434002 10.1016/S0049-3848(10)70010-4 PMC3827916 17 Wu H Liu X Jaenisch R Lodish HF Generation of committed erythroid BFU-E and CFU-E progenitors
does not require erythropoietin or the erythropoietin
receptor Cell 1995 83 59 67 7553874 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90234-1 18 Hirano I Suzuki N The Neural Crest as the First Production Site of the Erythroid
Growth Factor Erythropoietin Front Cell Dev Biol 2019 7 105 31245372 10.3389/fcell.2019.00105 PMC6581680 19 Zhu Y Wang T Gu J Huang K Zhang T Zhang Z Liu H Tang J Mai Y Zhang Y Li Y Characterization and generation of human definitive multipotent
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells Cell Discov 2020 6 89 33298886 10.1038/s41421-020-00213-6 PMC7705709 20 Alsinet C Primo MN Lorenzi V Bello E Kelava I Jones CP Vilarrasa-Blasi R Sancho-Serra C Knights AJ Park J-E Wyspianska BS Robust temporal map of human in vitro myelopoiesis using
single-cell genomics Nat Commun 2022 13 1 17 35610203 10.1038/s41467-022-30557-4 PMC9130280 21 Peschle C Mavilio F Carè A Migliaccio G Migliaccio AR Salvo G Samoggia P Petti S Guerriero R Marinucci M Haemoglobin switching in human embryos: asynchrony of
zeta----alpha and epsilon----gamma-globin switches in primitive and definite
erythropoietic lineage Nature 1985 313 235 238 2578614 10.1038/313235a0 22 Palis J Primitive and definitive erythropoiesis in
mammals Frontiers in Physiology 2014 5 10.3389/fphys.2014.00003 PMC3904103 24478716 23 Liu W Taso O Wang R Bayram S Graham AC Garcia-Reitboeck P Mallach A Andrews WD Piers TM Botia JA Pocock JM Trem2 promotes anti-inflammatory responses in microglia and is
suppressed under pro-inflammatory conditions Hum Mol Genet 2020 29 3224 3248 32959884 10.1093/hmg/ddaa209 PMC7689298 24 Jaitin DA Adlung L Thaiss CA Weiner A Li B Descamps H Lundgren P Bleriot C Liu Z Deczkowska A Keren-Shaul H Lipid-Associated Macrophages Control Metabolic Homeostasis in a
Trem2-Dependent Manner Cell 2019 178 686 698 e14 31257031 10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.054 PMC7068689 25 Wang Y Cella M Mallinson K Ulrich JD Young KL Robinette ML Gilfillan S Krishnan GM Sudhakar S Zinselmeyer BH Holtzman DM TREM2 Lipid Sensing Sustains the Microglial Response in an
Alzheimer’s Disease Model Cell 2015 160 1061 1071 25728668 10.1016/j.cell.2015.01.049 PMC4477963 26 Palis J Primitive and definitive erythropoiesis in
mammals Frontiers in Physiology 2014 5 10.3389/fphys.2014.00003 PMC3904103 24478716 27 Jaffredo T Gautier R Eichmann A Dieterlen-Lièvre F Intraaortic hemopoietic cells are derived from endothelial cells
during ontogeny Development 1998 125 4575 4583 9778515 10.1242/dev.125.22.4575 28 Yvernogeau L Gautier R Petit L Khoury H Relaix F Ribes V Sang H Charbord P Souyri M Robin C Jaffredo T In vivo generation of haematopoietic stem/progenitor cells from
bone marrow-derived haemogenic endothelium Nat Cell Biol 2019 21 1334 1345 31685991 10.1038/s41556-019-0410-6 29 Li Z Lan Y He W Chen D Wang J Zhou F Wang Y Sun H Chen X Xu C Li S Mouse Embryonic Head as a Site for Hematopoietic Stem Cell
Development Cell Stem Cell 2012 11 663 675 23122290 10.1016/j.stem.2012.07.004 30 Frame JM Fegan KH Conway SJ McGrath KE Palis J Definitive Hematopoiesis in the Yolk Sac Emerges from
Wnt-Responsive Hemogenic Endothelium Independently of Circulation and
Arterial Identity Stem Cells 2016 34 431 444 26418893 10.1002/stem.2213 PMC4755868 31 Rhodes KE Gekas C Wang Y Lux CT Francis CS Chan DN Conway S Orkin SH Yoder MC Mikkola HKA The emergence of hematopoietic stem cells is initiated in the
placental vasculature in the absence of circulation Cell Stem Cell 2008 2 252 263 18371450 10.1016/j.stem.2008.01.001 PMC2888040 32 Zeng Y He J Bai Z Li Z Gong Y Liu C Ni Y Du J Ma C Bian L Lan Y Tracing the first hematopoietic stem cell generation in human
embryo by single-cell RNA sequencing Cell Res 2019 29 881 894 31501518 10.1038/s41422-019-0228-6 PMC6888893 33 Thambyrajah R Mazan M Patel R Moignard V Stefanska M Marinopoulou E Li Y Lancrin C Clapes T Möröy T Robin C GFI1 proteins orchestrate the emergence of haematopoietic stem
cells through recruitment of LSD1 Nat Cell Biol 2016 18 21 32 26619147 10.1038/ncb3276 34 Efremova M Vento-Tormo M Teichmann SA Vento-Tormo R CellPhoneDB v2.0: Inferring cell-cell communication from combined
expression of multi-subunit receptor-ligand complexes 10.1101/680926 32103204 35 Jardine L Webb S Goh I Quiroga Londoño M Reynolds G Mather M Olabi B Stephenson E Botting RA Horsfall D Engelbert J Blood and immune development in human fetal bone marrow and Down
syndrome Nature 2021 598 327 331 34588693 10.1038/s41586-021-03929-x PMC7612688 36 Fröbel J Landspersky T Percin G Schreck C Rahmig S Ori A Nowak D Essers M Waskow C Oostendorp RAJ The Hematopoietic Bone Marrow Niche Ecosystem Front Cell Dev Biol 2021 9 705410 34368155 10.3389/fcell.2021.705410 PMC8339972 37 Murdoch B Chadwick K Martin M Shojaei F Shah KV Gallacher L Moon RT Bhatia M Wnt-5A augments repopulating capacity and primitive hematopoietic
development of human blood stem cells in vivo Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 100 3422 3427 12626754 10.1073/pnas.0130233100 PMC152308 38 Shen J Zhu Y Zhang S Lyu S Lyu C Feng Z Hoyle DL Wang ZZ Cheng T Vitronectin-activated αvβ3 and αvβ5
integrin signalling specifies haematopoietic fate in human pluripotent stem
cells Cell Prolif 2021 54 e13012 33656760 10.1111/cpr.13012 PMC8016644 39 Zhang P Zhang C Li J Han J Liu X Yang H The physical microenvironment of hematopoietic stem cells and its
emerging roles in engineering applications Stem Cell Res Ther 2019 10 327 31744536 10.1186/s13287-019-1422-7 PMC6862744 40 Eisele AS Cosgrove J Magniez A Tubeuf E Tenreira Bento S Conrad C Cayrac F Tak T Lyne A-M Urbanus J Perié L Erythropoietin directly remodels the clonal composition of murine
hematopoietic multipotent progenitor cells Elife 2022 11 10.7554/eLife.66922 PMC8884727 35166672 41 Yoshihara H Arai F Hosokawa K Hagiwara T Takubo K Nakamura Y Gomei Y Iwasaki H Matsuoka S Miyamoto K Miyazaki H Thrombopoietin/MPL signaling regulates hematopoietic stem cell
quiescence and interaction with the osteoblastic niche Cell Stem Cell 2007 1 685 697 18371409 10.1016/j.stem.2007.10.020 42 Ginhoux F Guilliams M Tissue-Resident Macrophage Ontogeny and
Homeostasis Immunity 2016 44 439 449 26982352 10.1016/j.immuni.2016.02.024 43 Gekas C Rhodes KE Gereige LM Helgadottir H Ferrari R Kurdistani SK Montecino-Rodriguez E Bassel-Duby R Olson E Krivtsov AV Armstrong S Mef2C is a lineage-restricted target of Scl/Tal1 and regulates
megakaryopoiesis and B-cell homeostasis Blood 2009 113 3461 3471 19211936 10.1182/blood-2008-07-167577 PMC2945827 44 Suzuki E Williams S Sato S Gilkeson G Watson DK Zhang XK The transcription factor Fli-1 regulates monocyte, macrophage and
dendritic cell development in mice Immunology 2013 139 318 327 23320737 10.1111/imm.12070 PMC3701178 45 Petreaca ML Yao M Liu Y DeFea K Martins-Green M Transactivation of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor-2
by Interleukin-8 (IL-8/CXCL8) Is Required for IL-8/CXCL8-induced Endothelial
Permeability Mol Biol Cell 2007 10.1091/mbc.e07-01-0004 PMC2096609 17928406 46 Lyu Z Jin H Yan Z Hu K Jiang H Peng H Zhuo H Effects of NRP1 on angiogenesis and vascular maturity in
endothelial cells are dependent on the expression of SEMA4D Int J Mol Med 2020 46 1321 1334 32945351 10.3892/ijmm.2020.4692 PMC7447310 47 Bisht K Okojie KA Sharma K Lentferink DH Sun Y-Y Chen H-R Uweru JO Amancherla S Calcuttawala Z Campos-Salazar AB Corliss B Capillary-associated microglia regulate vascular structure and
function through PANX1-P2RY12 coupling in mice Nat Commun 2021 12 5289 34489419 10.1038/s41467-021-25590-8 PMC8421455 48 Ginhoux F Greter M Leboeuf M Nandi S See P Gokhan S Mehler MF Conway SJ Ng LG Stanley ER Samokhvalov IM Fate mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia derive from
primitive macrophages Science 2010 330 841 845 20966214 10.1126/science.1194637 PMC3719181 49 Suo C Dann E Goh I Jardine L Kleshchevnikov V Park J-E Botting RA Stephenson E Engelbert J Tuong ZK Polanski K Mapping the developing human immune system across
organs Science 2022 376 eabo0510 35549310 10.1126/science.abo0510 PMC7612819 50 Vento-Tormo R Garcia-Alonso L Lorenzi V Mazzeo C Sancho-Serra C Roberts K Engelbert J Alves-Lopes J Marečková M Botting R Li T Single-cell roadmap of human gonadal development 2021 10.21203/rs.3.rs-496470/v1 PMC9300467 35794482 51 Dick SA Wong A Hamidzada H Nejat S Nechanitzky R Vohra S Mueller B Zaman R Kantores C Aronoff L Momen A Three tissue resident macrophage subsets coexist across organs
with conserved origins and life cycles Sci Immunol 2022 7 eabf7777 34995099 10.1126/sciimmunol.abf7777 52 Gayoso A Lopez R Xing G Boyeau P Valiollah Pour Amiri V Hong J Wu K Jayasuriya M Mehlman E Langevin M Liu Y A Python library for probabilistic analysis of single-cell omics
data Nat Biotechnol 2022 40 163 166 35132262 10.1038/s41587-021-01206-w 53 Lopez R Regier J Cole MB Jordan MI Yosef N Deep generative modeling for single-cell
transcriptomics Nat Methods 2018 15 1053 1058 30504886 10.1038/s41592-018-0229-2 PMC6289068 54 Chou S Lodish HF Fetal liver hepatic progenitors are supportive stromal cells for
hematopoietic stem cells Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107 10.1073/pnas.1003586107 PMC2867886 20385801 55 Ton M-LN Keitley D Theeuwes B Guibentif C Ahnfelt-Rønne J Andreassen TK Calero-Nieto FJ Imaz-Rosshandler I Pijuan-Sala B Nichols J Benito-Gutiérrez È Rabbit Development as a Model for Single Cell Comparative
Genomics bioRxiv 2022 2022.10.06.510971 10.1038/s41556-023-01174-0 37322291 56 Eze UC Bhaduri A Haeussler M Nowakowski TJ Kriegstein AR Single-cell atlas of early human brain development highlights
heterogeneity of human neuroepithelial cells and early radial
glia Nat Neurosci 2021 24 584 594 33723434 10.1038/s41593-020-00794-1 PMC8012207 57 Strachan T Lindsay S Wilson DI Molecular Genetics of Early Human Development 1997 Taylor & Francis 58 Belle M Godefroy D Couly G Malone SA Collier F Giacobini P Chédotal A Tridimensional Visualization and Analysis of Early Human
Development Cell 2017 169 161 173 e12 28340341 10.1016/j.cell.2017.03.008 59 Villani A-C Satija R Reynolds G Sarkizova S Shekhar K Fletcher J Griesbeck M Butler A Zheng S Lazo S Jardine L Single-cell RNA-seq reveals new types of human blood dendritic
cells, monocytes, and progenitors Science 2017 356 10.1126/science.aah4573 PMC5775029 28428369 60 Wolock SL Lopez R Klein AM Scrublet: Computational Identification of Cell Doublets in
Single-Cell Transcriptomic Data Cell Syst 2019 8 281 291 e9 30954476 10.1016/j.cels.2018.11.005 PMC6625319 61 Fleming SJ Marioni JC Babadi M CellBender remove-background: a deep generative model for
unsupervised removal of background noise from scRNA-seq
datasets 10.1101/791699 62 Wolf FA Alexander Wolf F Angerer P Theis FJ SCANPY: large-scale single-cell gene expression data
analysis Genome Biology 2018 19 10.1186/s13059-017-1382-0 PMC5802054 29409532 63 Mulè MP Martins AJ Tsang JS Normalizing and denoising protein expression data from
droplet-based single cell profiling 10.1101/2020.02.24.963603 PMC9018908 35440536 64 Wang H He J Xu C Chen X Yang H Shi S Liu C Zeng Y Wu D Bai Z Wang M Decoding Human Megakaryocyte Development Cell Stem Cell 2021 28 535 549 e8 33340451 10.1016/j.stem.2020.11.006 65 Korsunsky I Millard N Fan J Slowikowski K Zhang F Wei K Baglaenko Y Brenner M Loh P-R Raychaudhuri S Fast, sensitive and accurate integration of single-cell data with
Harmony Nat Methods 2019 16 1289 1296 31740819 10.1038/s41592-019-0619-0 PMC6884693 66 Büttner M Miao Z Wolf FA Teichmann SA Theis FJ A test metric for assessing single-cell RNA-seq batch
correction Nat Methods 2019 16 43 49 30573817 10.1038/s41592-018-0254-1 67 Traag VA Waltman L van Eck NJ From Louvain to Leiden: guaranteeing well-connected
communities Sci Rep 2019 9 1 12 30914743 10.1038/s41598-019-41695-z PMC6435756 68 Dann E Henderson NC Teichmann SA Morgan MD Marioni JC Differential abundance testing on single-cell data using
k-nearest neighbor graphs Nat Biotechnol 2022 40 245 253 34594043 10.1038/s41587-021-01033-z PMC7617075 69 Conde CD Domínguez Conde C Xu C Jarvis LB Gomes T Howlett SK Rainbow DB Suchanek O King HW Mamanova L Polanski K Cross-tissue immune cell analysis reveals tissue-specific
adaptations and clonal architecture in humans 10.1101/2021.04.28.441762 PMC7612735 35549406 70 Tarashansky AJ Musser JM Khariton M Li P Arendt D Quake SR Wang B Mapping single-cell atlases throughout Metazoa unravels cell type
evolution Elife 2021 10 10.7554/eLife.66747 PMC8139856 33944782 71 Edelstein A Amodaj N Hoover K Vale R Stuurman N Computer Control of Microscopes Using
µManager Current Protocols in Molecular Biology 2010 92 10.1002/0471142727.mb1420s92 PMC3065365 20890901 72 Hörl D Rojas Rusak F Preusser F Tillberg P Randel N Chhetri RK Cardona A Keller PJ Harz H Leonhardt H Treier M BigStitcher: reconstructing high-resolution image datasets of
cleared and expanded samples Nat Methods 2019 16 870 874 31384047 10.1038/s41592-019-0501-0 73 Gataric M Park JS Li T Vaskivskyi V Svedlund J Strell C Roberts K Nilsson M Yates LR Bayraktar O Gerstung M PoSTcode: Probabilistic image-based spatial transcriptomics
decoder bioRxiv 2021 2021.10.12.464086 74 Schindelin J Arganda-Carreras I Frise E Kaynig V Longair M Pietzsch T Preibisch S Rueden C Saalfeld S Schmid B Tinevez J-Y Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image
analysis Nat Methods 2012 9 676 682 22743772 10.1038/nmeth.2019 PMC3855844 75 Website GL Tracking Early Mammalian Organogenesis – Prediction and
Validation of Differentiation Trajectories at Whole Organism
Scale ExtendedMouseAtlas (available at  https://marionilab.github.io/ExtendedMouseAtlas/ ) 10.1242/dev.201867 PMC10906099 37982461 76 Crosse EI Gordon-Keylock S Rybtsov S Binagui-Casas A Felchle H Nnadi NC Kirschner K Chandra T Tamagno S Webb DJ Rossi F Multi-layered Spatial Transcriptomics Identify Secretory Factors
Promoting Human Hematopoietic Stem Cell Development Cell Stem Cell 2020 27 822 839 e8 32946788 10.1016/j.stem.2020.08.004 PMC7671940 77 Tabula Sapiens Consortium* Jones RC Karkanias J Krasnow MA Pisco AO Quake SR Salzman J Yosef N Bulthaup B Brown P Harper W The Tabula Sapiens: A multiple-organ, single-cell transcriptomic
atlas of humans Science 2022 376 eabl4896 35549404 10.1126/science.abl4896 PMC9812260 78 Domínguez Conde C Xu C Jarvis LB Rainbow DB Wells SB Gomes T Howlett SK Suchanek O Polanski K King HW Mamanova L Cross-tissue immune cell analysis reveals tissue-specific
features in humans Science 2022 376 eabl5197 35549406 10.1126/science.abl5197 PMC7612735 79 Yang AC Vest RT Kern F Lee DP Maat CA Losada PM Chen MB Agam M Schaum N Khoury N Calcuttawala K A human brain vascular atlas reveals diverse cell mediators of
Alzheimer’s disease risk bioRxiv 2021 2021.04.26.441262 10.1038/s41586-021-04369-3 PMC9635042 35165441 80 Stewart BJ Ferdinand JR Young MD Mitchell TJ Loudon KW Riding AM Richoz N Frazer GL Staniforth JUL Vieira FA Braga Botting RA Spatiotemporal immune zonation of the human
kidney Science 2019 365 1461 1466 31604275 10.1126/science.aat5031 PMC7343525 81 Brazovskaja A Gomes T Körner C He Z Schaffer T Eckel JC Hänsel R Santel M Denecke T Dannemann M Brosch M Cell atlas of the regenerating human liver after portal vein
embolization bioRxiv 2021 10.1101/2021.06.03.444016 PMC11239663 38992008 82 Mather M Haniffa M Botting RA Webb S The role of the yolk sac in human fetal development and
identification of a hepatocyte-like cell in the human yolk
sac BioStudies, E-MTAB-10552 2023 https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies/arrayexpress/studies/E-MTAB-10552 83 Webb S Haniffa M Stephenson E Human fetal yolk sac scRNA-seq data (sample ID: F158 for Haniffa
Lab; 16099 for HDBR) BioStudies, E-MTAB-11673 2022 https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies/arrayexpress/studies/E-MTAB-11673 84 Haniffa M Mather M Botting RA The role of the yolk sac in human fetal development and
identification of a hepatocyte-like cell in the human yolk sac
(SS2) BioStudies, E-MTAB-10888 2023 https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies/arrayexpress/studies/E-MTAB-10888 85 Haniffa M Stephenson E Webb S Human embryonic yolk sac CITE-seq data BioStudies, E-MTAB-11549 2022 https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies/arrayexpress/studies/E-MTAB-11549 86 Webb S Stephenson E Haniffa M Human embryonic liver CITE-seq data BioStudies, E-MTAB-11618 2022 https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies/arrayexpress/studies/E-MTAB-11618 87 Stephenson E Webb S Haniffa M Human fetal liver CITE-seq data BioStudies, E-MTAB-11613 2022 https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies/arrayexpress/studies/E-MTAB-11613 88 I Goh, FCA_yolkSac (v1.0.0) Zenodo 2023 10.5281/zenodo.7868304 89 Goh I Botting RA Inoue M Haniffa M Yolk sac cell atlas reveals multiorgan functions during early
development BioStudies, S-DHCA0 2022 https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies/bioimages/studies/S-DHCA0 10.1126/science.add7564 PMC7614978 37590359 One-Sentence Summary The human yolk sac is a key staging post in a relay of vital organismal functions
during human pregnancy. Fig. 1 A single-cell atlas of the human yolk sac. (A)  Schematic of experimental outline.  (B)  Summary of
data included in analyses. Squares represent new data and triangles represent
published data: YS ( 10 ,  12 ,  49 ,  64 ), AGM ( 12 ), liver ( 10 ), fetal BM ( 35 ), fetal
brain ( 56 ), fetal skin ( 49 ), fetal kidney ( 80 ), fetal gonads ( 50 ), mouse ( 75 ), iPSC ( 12 ,  20 ). Color indicates assay used ( data S6 ).
( C)  UMAP visualization of YS scRNA-seq data (n=10; k=169,798),
colors represent broad cell states: DC: dendritic cell, Mac: macrophage, MEM:
megakaryocyte—erythroid–mast cell lineage, MK: megakaryocyte,
pre.: precursor. ( D ) Left: Dot plot showing the mean expression
(color) and proportion of cells expressing genes (dot size) of broad cell states
in YS scRNA-seq data. Right: Equivalent protein expression (color) and
proportion of cells expressing proteins (dot size) from YS CITE-seq data (n=2;
k=3,578). Equivalent gene names are in parentheses. * indicates genes validated
by RNAscope and ** indicates proteins validated by IHC/IF ( data S4 ). Data are
variance-scaled and min-max-standardized. ( E ) Left: light-sheet
fluorescence microscopy of CD34 +  and LYVE1 +  vascular
structures in YS (representative ˜6.9 PCW sample; scale bar: 500
µm;  movie S1 ).
Right: Immunofluorescence of an ˜8 PCW YS highlighting endoderm (ASGR1;
red) and endothelium (CD34; yellow), costained with DAPI (cyan). Scale bar: 100
µm ( data S23 ).
( F ) RNAscope of YS (representative 8 PCW sample). Left:
endoderm ( SPINK1;  yellow), smooth muscle
( ACTA2;  red), AEC ( IL33;  blue), and
macrophages ( C1QA;  magenta) (scale bar: 200 µm). Right:
DCs ( CD1C ; yellow box) and macrophages ( C1QA ;
magenta box) (scale bar: 50 µm). Individual channels shown in  fig. S4A .
( G ) Left: Bar graph showing the proportion representation of cell
states in YS scRNA-seq data by gestational age. Right: Milo beeswarm plot of YS
scRNA-seq neighborhood differential abundance across time. Blue/red
neighborhoods are significantly enriched earlier/later in gestation
respectively. Color intensity denotes degree of significance ( data S24 ). Fig. 2 Multiorgan functions of YS. (A)  Dot plot showing the mean expression (color) and proportion of
YS and liver stromal cells (dot size) expressing stromal DEG markers ( data S3 ,  S7 , and  S21 ). YS scRNA-seq data
includes main and gastrulation (gastr.) data. Liver scRNAseq data includes
matched embryonic, fetal, and adult liver.  (B)  Flower plot
illustrating significantly enriched pathways in YS endoderm (pink) and embryonic
liver (EL) hepatocytes (blue). Conserved pathways between tissues are
highlighted in green and a dashed outline ( data S25 ).
 (C)  Columns 1-3: IHC staining of alpha fetoprotein
( AFP ), albumin ( ALB ) and alpha-1
antitrypsin ( SERPINA1 ) in 8 PCW YS and EL (middle), and adult
liver (bottom). Representative images of n=5 YS (4-8 PCW), n=3 ELs (7-8 PCW) and
n=3 adult liver samples. Columns 4-5: IHC staining of erythropoietin (EPO) and
thrombin (F2) in 7 PCW YS (top), 7 PCW EL (middle), and healthy adult liver
(bottom). Representative images from n=3 samples per tissue: YS (4-7 PCW), ELs
(7-12 PCW). Protein (brown) and nuclei (blue). Column 6: Martius Scarlet Blue
(MSB)-stained 8 PCW EL (representative of n=3) and 4 PCW YS (representative of
n=3). Nuclei (gray), erythroid (yellow), fibrin (red), and connective tissue
(blue) ( data S23 ).
Scale bars: 100 μm.  (D)  Dot plot showing the mean expression
(color) and proportion of cells in YS endoderm, embryonic, fetal and adult liver
hepatocytes, and stromal cells from fetal kidney (64). Brackets indicate
enriched GO annotations. Green ellipses denote genes with prenatal phenotypes in
homozygous null mice. Solid/hollow green outline denotes phenotype onset
prior/post fetal liver function respectively, as per  fig. S4E  ( data S25 )
 (E)  Dot plot showing the mean expression (color) and proportion
of cells expressing Milo-derived DEGs across gestation (dot size) in YS endoderm
( data S24 ). Genes
are grouped by function.  (F)  Schematic of the relative
contributions of YS (orange), liver (blue), and BM (purple) to hematopoiesis,
coagulation factor, and EPO production in the first trimester of human
development. Fig. 3 Early versus definitive hematopoiesis in YS and liver. (A)  Dot plot showing mean expression (color) and proportion of cells
expressing selected HSPC genes (dot size) in HSPCs from YS (main and
gastrulation ( 14 )), liver (EL and
fetal/FL ( 10 )), AGM ( 76 ), BM ( 35 ) and iPSC cultures (iPSC ( 20 ) and definitive iPSC ( 12 )).  (B)  Bar chart showing proportion of early (yellow) to
definitive HSPCs (green) in the YS scRNA-seq data grouped by gestational age.
 (C)  Density plots showing YS HSPC (top) and cycling HSPC
(bottom) with early (left) and definitive signatures (right) in an integrated
landscape as per  A . Color: population  z -scored KDE
( data S5 ). Tissue
contributions are shown in  fig. S5E .  (D)  Representative image of whole ˜4
PCW/CS12 human (top; n=4) and ˜E10.5/CS12 mouse embryo (bottom). Scale
bars: 1 mm.  (E)  Line graphs showing change in erythroid cell
proportion ( y -axis) enriched in globin gene expression across
gestational age. Colors indicate scRNA-seq dataset: Pink: human YS; Red: matched
EL. Shape size: cell count; scale: representative counts; No shape: count
<500. Globins grouped by roles in early or definitive hematopoiesis, and
repression.  (F)  FDG of hematopoietic cell states in the YS
scRNA-seq data (n=8, k=98,738; dots) integrated with human gastrulation ( 14 ) scRNA-seq data (n=1, k=91; triangles)
(left), and equivalent cell states in the mouse gastrulation scRNA-seq dataset
( 75 ) (n=28, k=4,717; dots) (right).
Colors represent cell states and clouds mark lineages.  (G)  Radial
plots showing lineage transition probabilities between pre-AGM (CS10-11; left)
and post-AGM (>CS14; right) YS early and definitive HSPCs. Color:
population  z -scored KDE. Density position indicates respective
lineage priming probability between macrophage, lymphoid (NK and B lineage),
erythroid, and MK terminal states. Arrows indicate proposed lineage priming
based on KDE.  (H)  Radial plots showing lineage transition
probabilities between iPSC-derived HSPCs (left) and definitive iPSC-derived
HSPCs (right). Interpretation as in  G,  with addition of embryonic
erythroid terminal state. Fig. 4 The lifespan of YS HSPCs. (A)  Bar chart showing the relative proportions of YS endothelial
cell (EC) subsets by age (PCW). EC: endothelial cells, AEC: arterial endothelial
cells, Sin. EC: sinusoidal endothelial cells, and HE: hemogenic endothelium.
 (B)  FDG overlaid with PAGA showing trajectory of HE transition
to HSPC in YS scRNA-seq data (n=3; CS10, 11 and 14; k=2,262) (top) and
iPSC-derived HSPC scRNA-seq data (n=7, k=437) ( 20 ) (bottom), with feature plots of key genes ( IL33,
ALDH1A1 ) involved in endothelial to hemogenic transition ( data S5 ).
 (C)  Dot plot showing the mean expression (color scale) and
proportion of cells expressing EC-associated genes (dot size) in HSPCs across
gestational age (PCW). HSPCs are derived from YS (including gastrulation), AGM
( 12 ), matched EL (embryonic liver),
FL (fetal liver) ( 10 ), fetal BM ( 35 ), iPSC-derived HSPC ( 20 ) and definitive iPSC-derived HSPC ( 12 ) scRNA-seq datasets. ( D) 
Dot plot of the mean expression (color scale) and the fraction of cells
expressing each gene (dot size) of curated genes predicted by CellphoneDB to
form statistically significant ( P <0.05)
protein–protein interactions between HSPCs (top plot) and stromal cells
(bottom plot) across all time gestational points. Brackets indicate which
protein counterparts form complexes ( data S29 ). Data are log-normalized, variance-scaled, and
min–max-standardized with a distribution of 0-1.  (E)  Heatmap
showing curated and statistically significant ( P <0.05)
CellphoneDB-predicted interactions between YS HSPCs and stromal cells that
change across gestation. Color scale indicates relative mean expression
 z -scores.  (F)  Schematic of selected and
statistically significant ( P <0.05) CellphoneDB-predicted
interactions between YS HSPCs and endoderm, fibroblasts (Fib), smooth muscle
cells (SMC), or EC derived from scRNA-seq data. Interactions are grouped by
predicted receptor to ECM interactions, ligand—receptor interactions, and
surface-bound ligand–receptor interactions. Receptors and ligands in
italics significantly decrease at CS17-23 (6-8 PCW) ( data S28  and  S29 ). Fig. 5 Accelerated macrophage production in YS and iPSC culture. (A)  Left: Line graph of monocyte and macrophage proportions in YS
scRNA-seq across time. Dashed line indicates pre- and post-AGM stages. Middle:
Milo beeswarm plot showing differential abundance of YS scRNA-seq myeloid
neighbourhoods across time. Color shows degree of enrichment (blue: early, red:
later) ( data S4  and
 S24 ). Right: Bar
chart of YS scRNA-seq myeloid cell state proportions across time.
Mono–mac int. monocyte macrophage intermediate.  (B)  Dot plot
showing the mean expression (color) and proportion of cells expressing monocyte
marker genes (dot size) in EL monocytes and YS myeloid cell states. Genes
include YS vs EL monocyte DEGs and established monocyte markers ( data S17 ).
 (C)  Left: FDG of macrophage trajectory in YS scRNA-seq, colored
by cell state, overlaid with PAGA showing monocyte-independent <CS14
(pre-AGM; n=2; k=3,561; top) and monocyte-dependent trajectories >CS14
(post-AGM; n=6; k=35,962; bottom) ( data S5 ). Right: FDG overlaid with scVelocity
directionality, colored by cell cycle gene enrichment (GO:000704 module).
 (D)  Heatmap of regulons associated with trajectories in
 C . TFs discussed in text highlighted (turquoise:
pre-macrophage; purple: monocyte-dependent).  (E)  Dot plot showing
the mean expression (color) and proportion of cells expressing macrophage and
microglia marker genes (dot size) in myeloid cell states in YS, AGM ( 12 ), skin ( 49 ), gonad ( 50 ), and brain
( 56 ) fetal scRNA-seq datasets ( data S13  and  S31 ).  (F) 
Heatmap of significant ( P <0.05) CellphoneDB-predicted
interactions between YS scRNA-seq TREM2 +  macrophages and ECs ( data S28 ). Color
represents  z -scored expression of gene pairs, brackets indicate
top curated interactions for cell-state pairs.  (G)  FDG of
macrophage trajectory in iPSC scRNA-seq ( 20 ), colored by cell state, overlaid with PAGA showing
monocyte-independent <D21 (n=5; k=779; left) and monocyte-dependent
>D21 (n=7; k=8,553; right) transitions ( data S7  and  S5 ).  (H) 
Heatmap of regulons associated with iPSC macrophage trajectories shown in
 G . TFs discussed in text are highlighted as in
 D .