pmc eLife Elife 1894 elife eLife eLife 2050-084X eLife Sciences Publications, Ltd PMC8626086 PMC8626086.1 8626086 8626086 34825887 10.7554/eLife.71752 71752 1 Tools and Resources Neuroscience Single-nucleus transcriptomic analysis of human dorsal root ganglion neurons Nguyen Minh Q 1 von Buchholtz Lars J 1 Reker Ashlie N 2 Ryba Nicholas JP https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2060-8393 nick.ryba@nih.gov 1 Davidson Steve https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2944-1144 davidsst@ucmail.uc.edu 2 
 1 
 National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health 
 Bethesda 
 United States 
 
 2 
 Department of Anesthesiology, College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati 
 Cincinnati 
 United States 
 Seal Rebecca Reviewing Editor 
 University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine 
 United States 
 Dulac Catherine Senior Editor 
 Harvard University 
 United States 
 26 11 2021 2021 10 371997 e71752 28 6 2021 06 11 2021 26 11 2021 29 11 2021 09 05 2024 This manuscript was published as a preprint at bioRxiv. 04 7 2021 https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/ This is an open-access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the  Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication . Somatosensory neurons with cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) project to the skin, muscles, bones, and viscera to detect touch and temperature as well as to mediate proprioception and many types of interoception. In addition, the somatosensory system conveys the clinically relevant noxious sensations of pain and itch. Here, we used single nuclear transcriptomics to characterize transcriptomic classes of human DRG neurons that detect these diverse types of stimuli. Notably, multiple types of human DRG neurons have transcriptomic features that resemble their mouse counterparts although expression of genes considered important for sensory function often differed between species. More unexpectedly, we identified several transcriptomic classes with no clear equivalent in the other species. This dataset should serve as a valuable resource for the community, for example as means of focusing translational efforts on molecules with conserved expression across species. somatosensation dorsal root ganglia transcriptomics pain itch Research organism Human Mouse http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000072 National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research ZIC DE 000561 Ryba Nicholas JP http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000065 National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke R01NS107356 Davidson Steve http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002 National Institutes of Health RFNS113881 Davidson Steve The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication. pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement yes pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC0 Author impact statement Single-nucleus transcriptomics exposes unique features of human somatosensory neurons and clues that may help resolve repeated problems in translating new experimental approaches for treating pain. Introduction The somatosensory system responds to a wide range of mechanical, thermal, and chemical stimuli to provide animals with critical information about their environment and internal state. For example, our sense of touch is mediated by mechanosensory neurons with soma located in the dorsal root and trigeminal ganglia that innervate the skin ( Abraira and Ginty, 2013 ). In addition to the skin, somatosensory neurons target specialized sensory environments like the cornea and conjunctiva or meninges ( von Buchholtz et al., 2020 ;  Huang et al., 2018 ), the internal organs ( Hockley et al., 2019 ) as well as bones and muscles to provide rich perceptual experiences and trigger appropriate behavioral, reflex, and autonomic responses ( Gatto et al., 2019 ). Among their many roles, somatosensory neurons provide input for the conscious perception of pain and itch ( Basbaum et al., 2009 ;  Mishra and Hoon, 2013 ) and the subconscious coordination of muscles and limbs known as proprioception ( Chesler et al., 2016 ). Peripheral neurites of somatosensory receptor cells must adapt to growth, reinnervate targets after injury and are also affected by inflammation ( Pongratz and Straub, 2013 ). Studies in model organisms have characterized a range of sensory and growth factor receptors and ion channels that contribute to the properties and selectivity of somatosensory neurons ( Le Pichon and Chesler, 2014 ;  Coste et al., 2010 ;  Ranade et al., 2014 ). Some of these, like the cooling and menthol sensing receptor ( Trpm8 ) appear to define functional classes of cells ( Bautista et al., 2007 ). By contrast, the sense of touch appears to use a complex distributed code involving several different types of cells ( von Buchholtz et al., 2021b ) to achieve its remarkable discriminatory power. For the most part, the human somatosensory system expresses the same range of functional genes as rodents ( Ray et al., 2018 ) and exhibits similar responses to many types of stimulus ( Adriaensen et al., 1983 ;  Basbaum et al., 2009 ;  Chesler et al., 2016 ;  Le Pichon and Chesler, 2014 ;  Ranade et al., 2014 ;  Bautista et al., 2014 ;  Davidson et al., 2016 ). Moreover, rare individuals with loss of function variants of several of these genes have deficits that recapitulate key effects of knocking out that gene in mice ( Chesler et al., 2016 ;  Murthy et al., 2018 ;  Szczot et al., 2018 ;  Drenth and Waxman, 2007 ;  Chen et al., 2015 ). However, despite the identified similarities between mice and humans, the success of translating new therapeutic strategies that are effective for treating pain in mice has often been disappointing when tested in human subjects ( Mogil, 2019 ;  Yezierski and Hansson, 2018 ). Recently, various directed genetic strategies have been used in mice to characterize the response properties and anatomical features of a variety of interesting classes of large diameter, fast conducting Aβ and Aδ subtypes ( Abraira and Ginty, 2013 ). Interestingly, these neurons generally have complex peripheral endings that often target hair follicles. Human skin hairs are quite different from those in mice, suggesting that there may be significant differences between the large diameter neurons in mice and humans. By contrast, most types of small diameter, slow conducting c-fibers terminate as free nerve endings both in mice and humans ( Basbaum et al., 2009 ). Single-cell sequencing approaches have produced a transcriptomic classification for mouse somatosensory neurons that corresponds well with their anatomy and function ( Gatto et al., 2019 ;  von Buchholtz et al., 2021b ;  Sharma et al., 2020 ;  Nguyen et al., 2019 ). In mice, at least two classes of small diameter neurons are best defined by different members of the Mrgpr family of GPCRs ( Sharma et al., 2020 ;  Nguyen et al., 2019 ). However, Mrgprs have undergone massive genetic expansion in rodents, not seen in other animals, often making it difficult to identify true orthologs in humans ( Dong et al., 2001 ;  Liu et al., 2009 ) and raising questions as to whether similar cells would have distinct molecular markers in the two species. A map of human somatosensory neuron transcriptomic classes would help uncover selective differences between the sensory neurons in mice and humans and provide clues as to how similar somatosensory input is in the two species. Finally, such analysis may provide important new targets to consider for translational approaches to treat both pain and itch. Here, we used nuclei-based single-cell transcriptomics to generate an initial description of human cell types, highlight similarities and surprising differences between somatosensory neuron classes in humans and mice that are reflected not only in terms of individual genes but can be discerned in co-clustering. We used multigene in situ hybridization (ISH) to help confirm these conclusions and present evidence for anatomic organization of functionally distinct neuronal classes in the human dorsal root ganglion. Results Generating a representative transcriptomic map of human somatosensory cell types Single lumbar L4 and L5 human dorsal root ganglia (DRG) were rapidly recovered from transplant donors within 90 min of cross-clamp and were immediately stored in RNAlater. Nuclei from individual ganglia were isolated and samples were enriched for neuronal nuclei by selection using an antibody to NeuN (see  Figure 1—figure supplement 1 ). Five ganglia from one male and four female donors with ages ranging from 34 to 55 were subjected to droplet based single nucleus (sn) capture, barcoding, and reverse transcription (×10 Genomics). Combinatorial clustering methods ( Stuart et al., 2019 ) allowed co-clustering of neuronal nuclei into a well-defined set of distinct transcriptomic groups that are well separated from their non-neuronal counterparts ( Figure 1A ,  Figure 1—figure supplement 2 ). After removal of non-neuronal nuclei from the dataset, reclustering the DRG-neuron data from 1837 cells identified a range of about a dozen diverse transcriptomic classes of human somatosensory neurons ( Figure 1B ,  Figure 1—figure supplements 2  and  3 ). Figure 1. Diverse classes of human dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons revealed by single nuclear transcriptomics. ( A ) Universal manifold (UMAP) representation of graph-based co-clustered snRNA sequences from human DRG nuclei reveal two well separated groups corresponding to sensory neurons (colored) and non-neuronal cells (gray). To the right, a dotplot highlights the expression of markers that help distinguish these groups of cells (see also  Figure 1—figure supplement 2A  for more information about preliminary analysis). ( B ) Reanalyzing 1837 neuronal nuclei clusters human DRG neurons into transcriptomically distinct groups that have been differentially colored. ( C ) Similarity in expression of differentially expressed genes between human and mouse neuronal types may help functional classification of neuronal types: UMAP representation of human DRG neurons showing relative expression level (blue) of diagnostic markers. For comparison UMAP representation of mouse neurons ( Renthal et al., 2020 ) showing the relative expression patterns of the same markers. In combination, the expression patterns of these and other genes ( Figure 1—figure supplements 2  and  4 ,  Figure 1—figure supplement 5 ) were used to tentatively match several human and mouse transcriptomic classes ( Figure 1—figure supplement 4 ). Figure 1—figure supplement 1. Human dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons express NeuN. ( A ) Confocal image showing section of a DRG ganglion stained using NeuN histochemistry (red) and neurotrace (green). Note that the large diameter neurons are strongly NeuN positive whereas neurotrace also detects non-neuronal structures (scale bar = 0.5 mm). Inset shows magnified view of the boxed region. ( B ) Immunohistochemistry (IHC) double staining using anti NeuN (red) anti-β3 tubulin (TUBB3, green) further demonstrates NeuN staining of both small and large diameter DRG soma; the tubulin staining primarily highlights neuronal processes rich in microtubules. Also shown is 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining emphasizing the need to enrich for neuronal nuclei prior to sequencing since the number of non-neuronal nuclei greatly exceeds those of neurons (scale bar = 100 µm). Figure 1—figure supplement 2. Support for the clustering of human dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons. ( A ) Universal manifold (UMAP) representation showing relative expression levels of the neuronal marker  SNAP25  (blue) and the non-neuronal gene  APOE  (red) in the initial clustering of sn-RNA sequencing data. It should be noted that the majority of the non-neuronal cells came from a single nuclear isolation where it is likely that neuronal nuclear purification was not effective. Sequence analysis indicated that most of the non-neuronal cells were satellite microglia although other cell types were also seen. ( B ) UMAP representation showing other markers that help distinguish non-neuronal nuclei from DRG neurons. ( C ) UMAP representation of the clustering of human DRG neurons highlighting the contributions of the six different preparations to the dataset. Note that clusters were populated with data from multiple different preparations. ( D ) UMAP representation of the number of genes identified per DRG neuron. ( E ) UMAP representation of 30 doublets predicted using DoubletFinder (see Methods). Figure 1—figure supplement 3. Robust clustering of human dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons. Universal manifold (UMAP) representations showing analysis of human DRG neurons using different parameters in Seurat. The choice of principal components (PCs) used for UMAP display and clustering is indicated to the left and for the left column the resolution of the clustering is shown above the UMAP. Note that the number of clusters detected varies with the resolution chosen. The right column shows the same UMAP as the left column but now the original identity of neurons from  Figure 1  has been mapped onto the clustering. Note that the 15 clusters map to relatively contiguous populations of neurons over a wide range of PC choices indicating that there are very robust transcriptomic differences between about a dozen different classes of DRG neurons in our dataset. Figure 1—figure supplement 4. Additional markers that support similarities between dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neuronal clusters across species. Universal manifold (UMAP) representations: upper panels, human sn-RNA sequencing; lower panels, mouse sn-RNA sequencing. To the left, identity of the different neuronal types is differentially colored. For the mouse, the identities of all clusters are indicated, for the human data, the position of names indicate the clusters with shared markers indicating a match to mouse neuronal types. The expression pattern of several such marker genes (blue) is shown to the right (see also  Figure 1  and  Figure 1—figure supplement 5 ). In the human dataset, Aδ nociceptors account for 26% of sequenced neurons; c-peptidergic nociceptors, 23% (including H5, 4%); Aβ neurons, 7%; proprioceptors, 2%; Aδ-LTMRs, 3%; and cool sensors, 3% (totaling 64% of all neurons). Other classes not identified as potential counterparts to mouse neurons based on preliminary analysis of marker expression were H4, 4%; H9, 2%; H10, 13%; H11, 10%; and H12, 7%. Figure 1—figure supplement 5. Dotplots of gene expression supporting similarity of several dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neuronal classes in mice and humans. Dotplots displaying information about the fractional expression and relative expression level of marker genes in the different identity classes of mouse (left, gray-green scale) and human (right, gray-blue scale). Marker genes were chosen based on their expression (or lack of expression) in particular classes of mouse neurons. Red boxes highlight the relationship between a particular mouse class and human neurons; fainter red boxes indicate human classes that share some characteristics with the highlighted mouse neurons. Left panel top to bottom: c-peptidergic nociceptors (c-PepNoc); Aδ-peptidergic nociceptors (Ad-PepNoc); cool sensing cells (Cool). Right panel top to bottom: AδLTMRs (Ad-LTMRs); Aβ neurons (Abeta); proprioceptors (Proprioc). The cyan box highlights H9 a human-specific cell type that expresses  TRPM8  but also nociceptor markers and the mechanosensitive channel  PIEZO2  unlike the putative cool sensing cells in human (H8) and in mice. One of the best studied groups of somatosensory receptors in mice are nociceptive peptidergic neurons that coexpress a variety of neuropeptides including substance P, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), and pituitary adenylate-cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP). These neurons are typically small soma diameter, nonmyelinated, slow conducting c-fibers, but also include faster conducting lightly myelinated Aδ neurons ( Sharma et al., 2020 ;  Nguyen et al., 2019 ). In the human DRG dataset,  TAC1  (substance P),  CALCA  and  CALCB  (CGRP), and  ADCYAP1  (PACAP), are expressed in several transcriptomic classes (H1, H2, H3, H5, and H6,  Figure 1C ,  Figure 1—figure supplements 4  and  5 ). For comparison the expression of the same genes in mouse DRG neurons is shown ( Figure 1C ,  Figure 1—figure supplements 4  and  5 ) using data from single nuclei sequencing ( Renthal et al., 2020 ). Just as in mice, the putative human peptidergic nociceptors express the high affinity nerve growth factor receptor  NTRK1 , the capsaicin and mustard oil-gated ion channels  TRPV1  and  TRPA1  but generally only low levels of the stretch-gated ion channel  PIEZO2  ( Figure 1C ,  Figure 1—figure supplements 4  and  5 ). Although previous localization studies have suggested that in humans the neurofilament protein  NEFH  is expressed in all sensory neurons ( Rostock et al., 2018 ), this gene showed graded expression in our data ( Figure 1C ) and marks several classes of cells just as in mice ( Figure 1—figure supplement 5 ). Some of these (including H3 and H6) also express peptidergic markers and the pain-related voltage-gated sodium channel  SCN10A  ( Figure 1—figure supplement 5 ) and thus have molecular hallmarks of Aδ nociceptors ( von Buchholtz et al., 2020 ). However, the neuronal classes H14 and H15 expressing the highest levels of  NEFH  are distinct from the peptidergic neurons ( Figure 1C ,  Figure 1—figure supplements 4  and  5 ), likely representing different types of large diameter, fast conducting myelinated Aβ neurons. These cell types are neurotrophin three receptor  NTRK3  positive, some also contain the brain derived neurotrophic factor receptor  NTRK2  but exhibit little expression of  NTRK1  ( Figure 1—figure supplements 4  and  5 ). In mice, proprioceptors are a subtype of Aβ neurons marked by the calcium binding protein parvalbumin, the transcription factor  Etv1  and the voltage-gated sodium channel subunits  Scn1a  and  Scn1b  ( Sharma et al., 2020 ;  Renthal et al., 2020 ). In the human data, the small H15 group of  NTRK3 -positive cells had this expression pattern ( Figure 1C ,  Figure 1—figure supplement 5 ) implying that proprioceptors have conserved transcriptomic markers in humans and mice. Similarly, small groups of both Aδ-low threshold mechanosensors (H13) and cool responsive neurons (H8) were identified by their characteristic expression profiles of functionally important transcripts ( Figure 1—figure supplement 5 ). Thus, large groups of human and mouse DRG neurons appear to share basic transcriptomic signatures and functional potential, supporting our data as informative about neuronal diversity among human somatosensory neurons. Despite these broad similarities between the putative peptidergic, proprioceptive, cooling sensitive, Aβ and Aδ classes of DRG neurons in mice and humans there were differences in expression of many genes. These include molecules that modulate cellular responses to internal signals (e.g., growth factor receptors), sensory stimuli and also the mediators they may release. For example, in humans, the H8 putative cool responsive neurons expressing  TRPM8  were strongly positive for the BDNF-receptor  NTRK2  but hardly expressed the neuropeptide  TAC1  whereas in rodents the converse was true ( Figure 1—figure supplement 5 ). Other genes that have been shown to control sensory responses in mice exhibit a different expression pattern in human DRG neurons. For instance,  Tmem100  encodes a protein that in mice has been implicated as playing an important role in functional interactions between  Trpv1  and  Trpa1  and contributing to persistent pain ( Weng et al., 2015 ). By contrast it was almost undetectable in the human sequencing data ( Figure 2A ). Similarly, we did not detect marked expression of the sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor  S1PR3  ( Figure 2A ) that has been suggested as a target for treating both pain and itch based on mouse work ( Hill et al., 2018 ). More strikingly, a small group of human neurons, H5, expressing  TRPA1  were resolved in our clustering ( Figure 2B ), whereas in mouse nuclear sequencing data no direct counterpart was detected ( Figure 1—figure supplement 4 ). Whole cell-based sequencing ( Sharma et al., 2020 ) of mouse DRG neurons does identify a group of peptidergic nociceptors (called CGRP-gamma) with abundant  Trpa1  expression, highlighting the caution needed when interpreting differences across species and the value of alternative approaches. Nonetheless, whereas mouse CGRP-gamma neurons strongly express  Calca  and  Ntrk1 , H5 cells are essentially  CALCA  (CGRP) and  NTRK1  negative and instead are strongly  NTRK2  positive ( Figure 1 ,  Figure 1—figure supplements 4  and  5 ) suggesting that they may respond differently to external stimuli as well as in their signaling properties and therefore may not be a direct equivalent of mouse CGRP-gamma neurons. Thus, the availability of human transcriptomic data should help focus translational work in model organisms on promising targets with conserved expression patterns in humans. Figure 2. Human DRG neurons exhibit specialization that distinguishes them from mouse counterparts. ( A ) Universal manifold (UMAP) representation of mouse and human dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons showing relative expression level (blue) of two genes that have been linked to pain sensation in mice. Note that both  TMEM100  and  S1PR3  are more sporadically expressed by the human somatosensory neurons. ( B ) Classes of DRG neurons that are selectively detected in humans are highlighted together with their expression of key genes. H9 neurons coexpress the cool and mechanosensory ion channels; for comparison cool sensitive neurons (H8) that correspond more closely with their rodent counterparts are also highlighted. ( C ) Expression profiles of several itch-related genes in the mouse and human DRG transcriptome. ( D ) Confocal image of a region from a human DRG that was labeled using multiplexed in situ hybridization (ISH) for  OSMR ,  TAC1 , and  NEFH  as indicated in the key. Almost all neurons were  OSMR ,  TAC1 , or  NEFH  positive ( Figure 2—figure supplement 1 ). However, few neurons were strongly positive for more than one of these markers (see  Figure 2—figure supplement 2  for individual channels). Note that autofluorescence in all channels from lipofuscin associated with many human neurons should not be confused with real signal (see  Figure 2—figure supplement 2  for more detail). Also note that  NEFH  is typically expressed in larger diameter neurons than the other two markers. Scale bar = 100 µm. Figure 2—figure supplement 1. Quantification of in situ hybridization (ISH) data. The extensive autofluorescence in ISH of human dorsal root ganglia (DRG) section prevents automated signal detection. Thus, quantitation of ISH data involves manually scoring positive and negative cells. Therefore, we only quantitated the highest intensity signals with the most clear-cut expression patterns. In total we scored 1101 total cells in sections from a 35-year-old female and an 18-year-old male donor. The proportion of positively scored cells for five probes where signal strength, consistency in expression level and frequency of positives allow confidence in the accuracy of scoring and the representative nature of the quantitation were:  NEFH , 54%;  SCN10A , 58%;  OSMR , 29%;  TAC1 , 25%; and  SST , 12%. ( A ) Bar graphs displaying the 10 pairs of combinations of these five probes (overlap, gray) represents cells expressing both markers in that bar; where overlap is extensive the identity of the second gene has been added above the bar. ( B ) Bar graph displaying expression of the three probes shown in  Figure 2D ;  NEFH , blue;  OSMR , red;  TAC1 , green; overlap between  NEFH  and  TAC1 , cyan;  NEFH  and  OSMR , magenta;  OSMR  and  TAC1 , yellow; only about 5% of cells were not positive for any of these three probes. ( C ) Bar graph displaying expression of the five probes; all populations that make up more than 5% of cells are colored and labeled. Rare combinations include cells positive for  NEFH ,  SCN10A , and  OSMR , 3%;  NEFH ,  SCN10A ,  SST , and  OSMR , 2%;  SCN10A  only, 2%;  SST  and  OSMR , 2%; and  SCN10A ,  TAC1 ,  SST , and  OSMR , 1%. None represents 3% of cells that were not positive for expression of these genes but were detected by other probes  TRPM8 ,  NTRK2 ,  PIEZO2 , and  TRPV1  used for hybridization of these sections. Figure 2—figure supplement 2. H10 and H11 are classes of human dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons that express a range of itch-related genes. ( A ) Dotplots displaying information about the fractional expression and relative expression level of marker genes in the different identity classes of mouse (left, gray-green scale) and human (right, gray-blue scale). Left panel, a selection of genes with relatively similar expression in H10 and H11 cells includes functionally relevant genes that tune mouse NP3 cells to respond to itch. Right panel shows genes that distinguish H10 and H11; some of these are also markers for mouse NP3 cells, others are more highly expressed in the other classes of mouse small diameter nonpeptidergic neurons. Red boxes highlight H10 and H11 and the four classes of mouse small diameter nonpeptidergic neurons. ( B ) Left three panels show individual channels for the in situ hybridization (ISH) shown in  Figure 2D  highlight  NEFH  as a marker for large diameter neurons and further emphasize the relatively limited overlap between these three probes. Strong autofluorescence signals that are present in all channels have been masked in white; four examples of autofluorescence (where there is also signal for one probe in that cell) are highlighted by stars. Right panel: the merged channels with brightness and contrast adjusted to help show that areas devoid of neurons are occupied with nerve fibers. Human DRG neurons without clear transcriptomic equivalents in mice Analysis of the gene expression patterns of the different classes of human somatosensory neurons revealed several groups for which we could not discern direct counterparts in the mouse. One small but prominent group of human DRG neurons (H9) expresses  TRPM8 ,  PIEZO2 ,  SCN10A , and  SCN11A  ( Figure 1—figure supplements 4  and  5 ,  Figure 2B ) and clearly segregates from the putative cool sensing cells (H8) that express  TRPM8, GPR26, NTM , and  FOXP2  but are devoid of both the light touch receptor and the pain-related sodium channels ( Figure 2B ,  Figure 1—figure supplement 5 ). In mice,  Trpm8  expression is simpler with the cool sensing, menthol responsive ion channel just expressed in cells with this latter gene expression pattern ( Figure 1—figure supplement 5 ). Interestingly, single fiber recordings have identified human neurons that respond to both cooling and gentle touch as might be expected for cells expressing both  TRPM8  and  PIEZO2  ( 33 ). Moreover, recent single-cell sequencing of macaque DRG neurons also identified two populations of cells that match H8 and H9 neurons ( Kupari et al., 2021 ). Finally, H9 neurons resemble (but also have differences from) human mechanosensory neurons that were recently engineered by transcriptional programming of stem cells ( Nickolls et al., 2020 ). A second larger group of human neurons H12 is marked by  NTRK3  and the voltage-gated ion channel  SCN1A , but is only weakly positive for  NEFH , expresses moderate levels of  PIEZO2  ( Figure 2B ,  Figure 1—figure supplement 5 ) and appears distinct from any potential mouse counterpart. The H12 gene expression pattern is most consistent with these cells functioning as a type of mechanosensor that has no direct equivalent in mice. Similarly, we designated H4 as c-nociceptors because of their expression of nociception-related  SCN10A  and  NTRK1  and low level of  NEFH  ( Figure 2B ,  Figure 1—figure supplement 5 ). These neurons expressed low levels of neuropeptides, but their overall gene expression patterns did not resemble any mouse counterparts including the nonpeptidergic nociceptors (see below). The two remaining large groups of neurons in the human dataset H10 and H11 that have no clear mouse counterpart exhibit most similarity with mouse c-type nonpeptidergic neurons ( Figure 2—figure supplement 2A ). At a functional level both H10 and H11 express receptors that in mice have roles in detecting pruritogens. For example, these clusters were positive for the two subunits ( IL31RA  and  OSMR ) of the interleukin 31 receptor and the histamine receptor  HRH1  ( Figure 2C ) that mediate mast cell-related scratching in mice ( Solinski et al., 2019 ). They also express the itch-related neuropeptide  NPPB  ( Figure 2C ), nociception-related sodium channels  SCN10A  and  SCN11A  as well as  TRPV1  ( Figure 2—figure supplement 2A ) but not appreciable  NEFH  or  TAC1  ( Figure 1C ). Therefore, it is likely that these are groups of putative unmyelinated, nonpeptidergic nociceptors with potential for triggering human itch responses. H10 and H11 characterization is revisited later in its own section of the results. The peptidergic nociceptors, myelinated Aβ and Aδ neurons, rarer human-specific cells, and the two nonpeptidergic nociceptor clusters H10 and H11 account for all the neurons in our analysis with H10 and H11 totaling approx. 20% of the neurons. In marked contrast, mouse nonpeptidergic, small diameter neurons are far more numerous than H10 and H11 accounting for 40% of the sensory neurons in mouse DRGs ( Renthal et al., 2020 ) and divide into four highly stereotyped transcriptional groups ( Figure 1—figure supplement 4 ). Two of these classes of mouse neurons (NP2 and NP3) trigger itch ( Mishra and Hoon, 2013 ;  Han et al., 2013 ), one (NP1, expressing  Mrgprd ) responds to noxious mechanical stimulation ( von Buchholtz et al., 2021b ). NP1 neurons may have a role in mechanonociception ( Gatto et al., 2019 ) and have recently been associated with suppression of skin inflammation ( Zhang et al., 2021 ), which was hypothesized as relevant for human health. The fourth class corresponds with low threshold mechanosensors (cLTMRs) that are thought to mediate affective touch ( Gatto et al., 2019 ;  McGlone et al., 2014 ). Given this difference between the transcriptomic map of human DRG neurons and their rodent counterparts, we next used independent ISH-based analysis to test basic predictions of the sequencing. If transcriptomic characterization of human DRG neurons is accurate then one clear expectation is that  TAC1 ,  NEFH , and  OSMR  should be expressed by distinct and only partially overlapping populations of human DRG neurons. If it is also comprehensive, that is, not missing equivalent classes to mouse neurons NP1, NP2, and cLTMRs that constitute almost a third of mouse DRG neurons and do not significantly express  Nefh ,  Tac1 , or  Osmr , then we would anticipate that the same three markers should label the vast majority of neurons. Multigene ISH demonstrates that both these predictions are true for human DRG neurons ( Figure 2D ,  Figure 2—figure supplements 1B  and  2B ) with essentially every cell labeled by one of these probes but with very few exhibiting strong coexpression. Although  NEFH  expression could be detected in some of the cells positive for the other markers ( Figure 2D ,  Figure 2—figure supplement 1B ), many  TAC1 - or  OSMR -positive small diameter neurons were negative for this neurofilament subunit. Moreover,  TAC1  and  OSMR  labeled almost completely separate sets of cells ( Figure 2—figure supplement 1 ). Notably, in keeping with our assignments based on transcriptomic data, the largest diameter neurons were strongly positive for  NEFH  whereas  TAC1  and  OSMR  primarily labeled smaller cells ( Figure 2D ). Finally, these three markers each labeled a large group of neurons ( Figure 2—figure supplement 1 ). Co-clustering human and mouse DRG-neuron snRNAseq data As detailed above, the expression of genes that are thought to be important for functional and morphological features of somatosensory neurons reveal similarities between groups of human and mouse neurons. They also expose differences that likely reflect distinct somatosensory adaptations in the two species. We next used co-clustering methods to test whether the wider transcriptome could reveal additional information about the relationships between classes of human and rodent DRG neurons using the same mouse dataset ( Renthal et al., 2020 ) that we analyzed above ( Figure 1 ,  Figure 1—figure supplement 4 ). We used the well-established approach developed by the Satija lab ( Stuart et al., 2019 ) as it has been shown to perform well without forcing false matches. As predicted, several classes of human neurons grouped with corresponding mouse counterparts including H15 – proprioceptors, H14 – Aβ cells, H13 – AδLTMRs, H11 – NP3 ( Nppb ) neurons, and H3/H6 – Aδ nociceptors ( Figure 3A ). This analysis suggested that H10 the other cluster that gene expression indicated are also itch related most closely resembled NP1 ( Mrgprd ) neurons rather than any other human or mouse class of sensory neurons. The H12 cluster, which is human specific, grouped close to larger diameter mouse neurons, whereas other clusters of human cells appeared better aligned with smaller diameter nociceptors. However, all types of peptidergic small diameter nociceptors were less organized in the co-clustering and separated from their potential mouse counterparts despite their qualitatively similar expression of some of the best-known functional markers ( Figure 1—figure supplement 4 ). Figure 3. Co-clustering of human and mouse neurons support tentative assignments based on select genes. ( A ) Universal manifold (UMAP) representation of the co-clustering of mouse and human neurons. Upper panel shows the mouse neurons colored by their identity when analyzed alone ( Figure 1—figure supplement 1 ); lower panel shows human neurons colored by their identity when analyzed alone ( Figure 1 ). Note that large diameter human neurons match their expected mouse counterparts reasonably well and that the two classes of neurons expressing itch-related transcripts H10 and H11 best match NP1 and NP3 neurons, respectively. ( B ) Heatmap showing the natural logarithm (see scale bar) of Kullback–Leibler divergences for the various human neuron classes when compared to each class of mouse cells as a reference distribution; potentially human-specific classes based on functional markers are marked by *; see also  Figure 3—figure supplement 1 . Figure 3—figure supplement 1. More detailed analysis of relationships between human and mouse cell types. ( A ) Universal manifold (UMAP) representation of clustered mouse neurons using parameters that identify 19 different groups of cells and ( B ) their distribution in the co-clustering with human neurons. ( C ) Heatmap showing the natural logarithm (see scale bar) of Kullback–Leibler divergences for the various human neuron classes when compared to each class of mouse cells as a reference distribution; potentially human-specific classes based on functional markers are marked by *. Note that despite the increased granularity of clustering results were highly consistent with those in  Figure 3 . UMAP plots ( Figure 3A ) provide a visual representation of similarity between cells with related transcriptomic properties. However, co-clustering methods do not provide a quantitative measure of the similarity between individual cells or clusters of cells. A given cell cluster can be viewed as a multivariate probability distribution in gene expression space. While not commonly employed in gene expression analysis, in probability and information theory, the similarity/dissimilarity between two probability distributions is most commonly measured by calculating their Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence. Recent advances have allowed KL divergence to be estimated between two samples in continuous multivariate space ( Perez-Cruz, 2008 ) as is observed in dimensionality reduced gene expression data of cell populations. Therefore, we made use of KL divergence estimation to quantitate the similarity between human DRG-neuron clusters and all their potential mouse counterparts ( Figure 3B ). As expected, clusters that co-segregate in the UMAP analysis showed greatest similarity but additional relationships not apparent from the visual representation of the co-clustering were also seen. For example, the small cluster of human ‘cool’ responsive neurons H8 showed greatest similarity to mouse Trpm8 cells and several groups of human cells (H1, H2, and H5) that gene expression predicted should be c-type peptidergic nociceptors, indeed best matched these cells ( Figure 3B ). Interestingly, no class of human neurons showed appreciable similarity to mouse cLTMRs. Among the groups of cells that had human-specific gene expression patterns, H5 best matched c-peptidergic nociceptors, H9 (the putative cool and mechanical responsive cells) showed only weak similarity to any mouse neuron class. H12, which we considered likely to be mechanosensors best matched mouse proprioceptors and H4 neurons appeared distantly related to several classes of nociceptor but without a clear match in mice. We also extended this analysis to mouse clustering where similar cell populations had not been combined ( Figure 3—figure supplement 1 ). Although 19 clusters of mouse neurons were now analyzed, neither mouse cLTMRs nor the potentially human-specific classes H4, H9, or H12 better matched a cell types of the other species. One important caveat to this type of analysis remains that any functional conclusions based on shared transcriptomic features still need to be verified experimentally. Transcriptomically related neurons are spatially grouped in the human dorsal root ganglion From sequence analysis, we identified a range of potential markers to better explore the diversity of human DRG neurons using ISH. To maximize information, we chose a multiplexed approach that allows localization of up to 12 probes ( Figure 4 ) revealing the different classes of sensory neurons identified in the transcriptomic data. For example,  TRPM8  expressing neurons clearly segregate into two distinct types ( Figure 4A ,  Figure 4—figure supplement 1 ). One set of cells (H8) share other transcriptomic properties with mouse cooling responsive cells:  TRPM8 , the cool and menthol receptor is not coexpressed with the ion channels  SCN10A  or  PIEZO2  ( Figure 4A ), but unlike in mice these cells are  NTRK2  positive ( Figure 4—figure supplement 1 ). By contrast, other cells (H9) coexpress the pain and light touch related ion channels ( SCN10A  and  PIEZO2 ) with  TRPM8  ( Figure 4A ,  Figure 4—figure supplement 1 ). Similarly, putative proprioceptive neurons (H15) were distinguished by their expression of  NEFH ,  PIEZO2 , and  PVALB  and lack of  NTRK2  ( Figure 4B ,  Figure 4—figure supplement 1 ). One surprise ( Figure 4A, B ) was that in small fields of view, several examples of all three of these rare neuron types could be identified in human DRGs. However, much of the rest of the ganglion was devoid of these cell types and instead the neurons there had distinct sets of markers. Therefore, it appears that transcriptomic classes of human DRG sensory neurons may not be stochastically distributed in the ganglion. Indeed, when we examined the distribution of nociceptors and myelinated neurons at lower magnification (using strong selective probes), broad clustering of similar types of neurons was apparent, quantifiable, and statistically significant ( Figure 4C, D ). We carried out a similar analysis in mouse DRG neurons using  Nefh  and  Scn10a  probes and found that there too, cells expressing these markers are not uniformly distributed ( Figure 4—figure supplement 2 ) suggesting spatial clustering of related DRG neurons may be a common feature across species. Figure 4. Transcriptomically related classes of human dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons are spatially clustered in the ganglion. Confocal images of sections through a human DRG probed for expression of key markers using multiplexed in situ hybridization (ISH); see  Figure 4—figure supplement 1  for the individual panels and additional probes. ( A ) Left panel shows a group of four H8-neurons (yellow arrows) that express  TRPM8  (green) but not  PIEZO2  (red) or  SCN10A  (blue). By contrast, right panel shows a different region of the ganglion where three H9-neurons coexpress these three transcripts (double arrowheads). ( B ) Other regions of the ganglia were dominated by larger diameter neurons. Putative proprioceptors, highlighted by double arrowheads, expressing  PIEZO2  (green) and  PVALB  (red), but not  NTRK2  (blue) were typically highly clustered in the ganglion. ( C ) Lower magnification images of complete sections stained for  NEFH  (green) and  SCN10A  (red) highlight the extensive co-clustering of large and small diameter neurons in different individuals. Scale bars = 100 µm in ( A  and  B ); 500 µm in ( C ). ( D ) The nearest  n  neighbors of  NEFH  and  SCN10A  single positive neurons in ( C ) were identified (for  n  = 1–40): green lines represent proportion (mean, solid line ± standard error of mean [SEM], shaded) of cells surrounding  NEFH -positive neurons; red lines, proportion (mean, solid line ± SEM, shaded) of cells surrounding  SCN10A -positive neurons. Left panel: proportion of surrounding cells that were  NEFH  positive. Right panel: proportion of surrounding cells that were  SCN10A  positive. Dashed black lines are the proportions expected for randomly distributed cells. Insets schematically show a central cell (highlighted by a star) and the surrounding neurons. Neighboring  NEFH -positive cells are colored green and  SCN10A -positive cells are colored red when these are being scored in the associated graph; gray cells are positive for the other marker. Clustering was statistically significant across the complete range (1–40 neighbors), p ≤ 6.96 × 10 −42  (one-tailed Mann–Whitney  U -test);  n  = 803 single positive cells confirming both short and long-range grouping of similar classes of human DRG neurons. Figure 4—figure supplement 1. Expression profiles of clusters of H8 (cool), H9 (human-specific), and H15 (proprioceptive) neurons. Individual channels for the in situ hybridization (ISH) images in  Figure 4  are shown to highlight the expression patterns described in the text. Strong autofluorescence signals that are present in all channels have been masked in white. Additional combinations of gene expression data in these regions of the ganglion are shown to identify neurons and reveal extra transcriptomic information. ( A ) Spatial clusters containing H8 putative cool sensing neurons (left) and H9 cool/mechanosensory nociceptors (right) are shown and identified as in  Figure 4A . H8 neurons are generally  NTRK2  positive but are only weakly positive for  NEFH . By contrast, H9 cells are  NEFH  positive but do not express significant  NTRK2 , in keeping with transcriptomic data. Note that clusters of these neurons segregate in distinct fields of the ganglion. ( B ) H15 (presumptive proprioceptors) form a subcluster of  NEFH -positive cells that are essentially devoid of nociceptors (marked by  SCN10A ) including nonpeptidergic neurons expressing  OSMR . Many of the  PVALB -negative large diameter neurons in this region of the ganglion were  NTRK2  positive; by contrast this gene was not detectable in H15 cells in keeping with the transcriptomic data. Scale bars = 100 µm; arrows and arrowheads are as in  Figure 4 . Figure 4—figure supplement 2. Expression profiles of clusters of H8 (cool), H9 (human-specific), and H15 (proprioceptive) neurons. ( A ) Confocal images of mouse lumbar dorsal root ganglia (DRG) in situ hybridization (ISH) showing  Nefh  (green) and  Scn10a  (red); scale bars = 100 µm. ( B ) The nearest n neighbors of  Nefh  and  Scn10a  single positive neurons were identified (for  n  = 1–40): green lines represent proportion (mean, solid line ± standard error of mean [SEM], shaded) of cells surrounding  Nefh -positive neurons; red lines, proportion (mean, solid line ± SEM, shaded) of cells surrounding  Scn10a -positive neurons. Left panel: proportion of surrounding cells that were  Nefh  positive. Right panel: proportion of surrounding cells that were  Scn10a  positive. Dashed black lines are the proportions expected for randomly distributed cells. Insets schematically show a central cell (highlighted by a star) and the surrounding neurons. Neighboring  Nefh -positive cells are colored green and  Scn10a -positive cells are colored red when these are being scored in the associated graph; gray cells are positive for the other marker. Clustering was statistically significant across the complete range (1–40 neighbors), p ≤ 3.98 × 10 −15  (one-tailed Mann–Whitney  U -test);  n  = 1117 single positive cells confirming both short- and long-range grouping of similar classes of mouse DRG neurons. H10 and H11 are distinct but related types of human nonpeptidergic neurons Perhaps the most intriguing classes of human somatosensory neurons revealed by our transcriptomic approach are the H10 and H11 classes that primarily share features with the mouse nonpeptidergic nociceptors NP1–3 ( Figures 2  and  3 ,  Figure 2—figure supplement 2 ,  Figure 5—figure supplement 1 ). ISH showed that the H10 and H11 classes of neurons, identified by their expression of  OSMR  were small diameter neurons comparable in size to the  TAC1 -expressing peptidergic nociceptors ( Figure 5A ). Two qualitatively different ratios of  SCN10A  and  OSMR  were apparent in these cells ( Figure 5A ) hinting at their distinct identities. Our data ( Figure 2 ,  Figure 2—figure supplement 2 ,  Figure 5—figure supplement 1A ) show that H10 and H11 neurons express a number of genes that are known markers of mouse NP3 cells and functionally important for triggering pruritic responses ( Gatto et al., 2019 ;  Solinski et al., 2019 ). They are also distinguished from each other by expression of genes that likely play roles in itch and other aspects of somatosensation ( Figure 5B ,  Figure 2—figure supplement 2 ,  Figure 5—figure supplement 2 ). For example, although not prominently expressed, the human chloroquine responsive receptor  MRGPRX1  ( 27 ) localized selectively to H10 neurons ( Figure 5B ) perhaps suggesting a relationship to mouse NP2 cells. By contrast, Janus kinase 1 ( JAK1 ), a mediator of itch through various types of cytokine signaling, including through OSMR ( Oetjen et al., 2017 ), and the neuropeptide  SST  are particularly strongly expressed in H11 cells ( Figure 5B ). Both these genes are prominent markers of NP3 pruriceptors in mouse ( Figure 5B ). However, not all known itch-related transcripts are expressed in H10 and H11 neurons and both classes of cells express genes that better define NP1 neurons in mice as well as other cell types ( Figure 5B ,  Figure 2—figure supplement 2 ,  Figure 5—figure supplement 2 ). Figure 5. Two related classes of human nonpeptidergic small diameter neurons that may mediate itch. ( A ) Confocal image of a section through a human dorsal root ganglia (DRG) probed for nociception-related genes using multiplexed in situ hybridization (ISH). In this view, many neurons expressing the itch-related transcript,  OSMR  (red), are grouped together (arrowheads); cyan arrowheads point to cells that express relatively higher levels of  OSMR  than  SCN10A  (green). Peptidergic nociceptors marked by expression of  TAC1  (blue) and additional  SCN10A- positive cells are also present in this region of the ganglion. ( B ) Universal manifold (UMAP) representation of mouse and human DRG neurons showing relative expression level (blue) of genes that distinguish H10 and H11 and mark-specific sets of mouse NP1–3 neurons.  MRGPRX1  is the human chloroquine receptor and the functional equivalent of  Mrgpra3 , which in mice marks NP2 cells. Note that coexpression patterns of  SST  and  JAK1  in H11 neurons resembles their expression in mouse NP3 pruriceptors but the ion channel  TRPC3  which also marks these cells is primarily expressed in mouse NP1 neurons; see  Figure 5—figure supplement 1  for additional breakdown of similarities and differences between nonpeptidergic neurons in mice and humans. ( C ) Confocal image of the group of candidate pruriceptors shown in ( A ) probed for expression of genes that distinguish H11 ( SST , blue) from H10 cells ( PIEZO2 , green); note that neurons highlighted with cyan arrowheads have gene expression expected for H11 cells, whereas some H10 cells express lower levels of  SST  and also exhibit variation in the level of  PIEZO2  expression. Scale bars = 100 µm; see  Figure 5—figure supplement 1B  for individual channels and for expression of additional markers. Figure 5—figure supplement 1. Expression profiles of human H10 and H11 dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons. ( A ) Confocal in situ hybridization (ISH) images illustrating weak expression of itch-related transcripts  HRH1  (upper panels, red) and  NPPB  (lower panels, red) in H10 and H11 neurons. Left image shows multiplex ISH of a region of a DRG section where H10 and H11 cells can be recognized by expression of  OSMR  (green); H11 cells also express  SST  (blue). To the right, individual channels demonstrating low-level expression of  HRH1  and  NPPB  (punctate red signal) in H10 and H11 neurons. ( B ) Individual channels for the ISH images in  Figure 5  are shown to highlight the expression patterns described in the text. Strong autofluorescence signals that are present in all channels have been masked in white. In addition, ISH reveals that H10 and H11 neurons also express  TRPV1  but as expected from the transcriptomic data at most express very low levels of  NEFH . Scale bars = 100 µm; arrowheads are as in  Figure 5 ; to further highlight the relevant cells,  OSMR -positive cells are highlighted by dotted outlines that match the coloring of arrowheads. Figure 5—figure supplement 2. Gene expression patterns in H10 and H11 classes of human dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons are distinct from classes of mouse small diameter nonpeptidergic neurons. ( A ) Dotplots displaying information about the fractional expression and relative expression level of marker genes in the different identity classes of mouse (left, gray-green scale) and human (right, gray-blue scale). From top to bottom, markers of NP1, NP2, and cLTMRs in mice generally show only limited expression in the presumptive human nonpeptidergic nociceptors H10 and H11. NP1-selective genes confirm greater similarity of H10 neurons to this type of mechanonociceptor. Right panels: Universal manifold (UMAP) representation of mouse and human DRG neurons showing relative expression level (blue) of several genes that highlight differences between H10 and H11 neurons and potential mouse counterparts. ( B ) UMAP representation of mouse and human DRG neurons showing relative expression level (blue) of several genes highlighting differences between H10 and H11 neurons and potential mouse counterparts. H10 cells are also distinguished from H11 and mouse pruriceptors by their prominent expression of the stretch-gated ion channel  PIEZO2  ( Figure 1C ,  Figure 2—figure supplement 2 ). The coexpression of itch-related transcripts and this low threshold mechanosensor hint that H10 neurons may be responsible for the familiar human sensation known as mechanical itch. However, their relationship to NP1-neurons revealed by co-clustering mouse and human data ( Figure 3 ) and their expression of markers for various other cell types ( Figure 2—figure supplement 2 ,  Figure 5—figure supplement 2 ) possibly including nonpeptidergic cLTMRs suggest that their role in somatosensation may not be limited to itch alone. A problem with single-cell sequencing approaches is the sparse nature of the data making it difficult to disentangle expression level from proportional representation in any cluster. This means that except for the most highly expressed genes, there is inherent ambiguity in interpreting the expression patterns. ISH provides an independent and more analog assessment of expression level that can help resolve this issue. Multiplexed ISH showed that  SST  divides the  OSMR -positive cells into two intermingled types ( Figure 5C ) in keeping with the sequence data ( Figure 5B ) and the relative expression patterns of  SCN10A  and  OSMR  ( Figure 5A ). Moreover, the prediction that  PIEZO2-OSMR  coexpression should mark  SST -negative neurons was also largely borne out by ISH ( Figure 5C ,  Figure 5—figure supplement 1 ). However, ISH also shows that some neurons expressing lower levels of  SST  are  PIEZO2 -positive and that some  OSMR -positive H10 cells, contain only a very low level of the mechanosensory channel ( Figure 5C ,  Figure 5—figure supplement 1 ). Therefore, H10 and H11 are by no means homogeneous populations and may not be as functionally distinct as snRNA clustering suggests. Discussion Transcriptomic analysis of DRG neurons confirms that mouse and human somatosensory neurons express many of the same genes ( Ray et al., 2018 ). However, although gross similarity in the transcriptomic classification of these cells can be discerned in single-cell analyses (peptidergic versus nonpeptidergic; neurofilament rich, myelinated versus nonmyelinated), the patterns of coordinated gene expression across species are not well conserved and both species exhibit unique specializations. Recently, available transcriptomic data from the macaque further highlights the individuality of somatosensory neurons across species ( Kupari et al., 2021 ). Surprisingly, in that study, despite major differences in gene expression between the monkey and mouse cell types, co-clustering approaches found an apparently close relationship between them including identification of large and distinct groups of NP1, NP2, and NP3 cells and putative cLTMRs ( Kupari et al., 2021 ). However, perhaps because of fragility of large diameter neurons in cell-based droplet sequencing approaches, no candidate Aβ neurons and only very few Aδ cells were recovered ( Kupari et al., 2021 ). By contrast our transcriptomic data and analysis combined with multiplexed ISH provide strong evidence for similarities between large diameter neurons between humans and mice but major differences in small diameter nonpeptidergic neurons as well as the existence of other human-specific cell types. Since in humans all nonpeptidergic neurons express  TRPV1  whereas mouse NP1, NP2, and cLTMRs do not prominently express this gene, this fits well with recent data showing much broader expression of  TRPV1  in humans than mice ( Shiers et al., 2020 ). At one level, this type of interspecies variation was unexpected given that there is similarity between the neuronal classes that comprise the mouse lumbar DRGs and trigeminal ganglia despite their very different types of innervation targets ( Sharma et al., 2020 ;  Nguyen et al., 2019 ). However, large changes in the receptive repertoire of other sensory systems have been observed and are thought to play a role in adaptation to specific ecological niches ( Yarmolinsky et al., 2009 ). Thus, the evolution of DRG receptor cell diversity further highlights the importance of appropriate sensory input for fitness and survival of a species. What is unusual relative to other senses is that transcriptomic differences are not limited to just the receptor repertoire for sensing environmental stimuli but instead extend to genes involved in the development and maintenance of defined neuronal subtypes. It is possible that this reflects major differences between mouse and human skin including fur covering. From a translational viewpoint, these differences could explain some of the problems in replicating results from mouse-based therapies ( Mogil, 2019 ;  Yezierski and Hansson, 2018 ) in humans and the availability of the human data may help direct research toward new targets and even suggest precision medicine strategies (e.g., to treat cold pain). Our analysis identified particularly surprising differences between small diameter nonpeptidergic neurons in mice and humans (H10 and H11 cell types). In mice, one distinctive subset of these cells are the cLTMRs that innervate hairy skin and are thought to be responsible for affective touch ( McGlone et al., 2014 ). At a transcriptomic level, humans do not have a clearly identifiable correlate for these cells ( Figure 3B ) although careful microneurography has revealed human c-fibers that respond to stroking ( Wessberg et al., 2003 ). We suspect that some of these stroking responsive cells may be the nonpeptidergic H10 neurons that express itch-related genes as well as high levels of  PIEZO2 . In keeping with this suggestion, a recent preprint of a spatial transcriptomic analysis of human somatosensory gene expression ( Tavares-Ferreira et al., 2021 ) designates cLTMRs as a subset of cells resembling H10 neurons that appear to have lower expression of some pruriceptive markers. However, it is also possible that human cLTMRs are other  PIEZO2 -expressing neurons that are unique to humans ( Figure 2B ,  Figure 1—figure supplement 3 ). H10 and H11 neuron classes have more clear similarity to the mouse NP1–3 neurons but also exhibit major differences to all three types of cells. For example, in mice NP1 cells express a large combination of diagnostic markers ( Figure 5—figure supplement 2 ) including  Mrgprd  that we did not find in our sequencing of human ganglion neurons. Bulk sequencing studies have identified  MRGPRD  expression in human DRG ( Price et al., 2016 ), but recent ISH localization studies suggest only very low-level expression of this transcript together with  MRGPRX1  in somatosensory neurons ( Klein et al., 2021 ). This would fit with our co-clustering that identifies the  MRGPRX1 -expressing H10 neurons as related to NP1 cells. However, many of the other NP1 markers have potential roles in signal detection and transduction but are not H10 selective ( Figure 5—figure supplement 2 ). Moreover, in mice,  Mrgpra3  (the functional equivalent of  MRGPRX1 ) marks the distinct NP2 neurons. Taken together, our results and analysis suggest that experiments in mice are likely to illustrate general principles that are important for sensory detection and perception in humans but also imply that specific details related both to genes and cell-type responses may differ. In future studies, the central projections and targets of human somatosensory neuron subtypes might provide independent approaches for inferring function. Similarly, using immunohistochemistry (IHC) to understand how these cell classes innervate the skin and other tissues may allow correlation of arborization patterns with microneurography results. Since microneurography can be complemented by microstimulation this could ultimately reveal the role of specific neuronal classes in sensory perception ( Ackerley and Watkins, 2018 ). Our data provide a searchable database for gene expression in human DRG neurons. However, there are some limitations to the data and interpretation. For example, neither the number of neurons sequenced, nor the depth of sequencing is as comprehensive as for mice ( Sharma et al., 2020 ;  Nguyen et al., 2019 ). This means that rare neuronal subtypes and the expression patterns of even some moderately expressed genes may not be clear therefore it is likely that future studies and larger samples will be needed to refine these issues. Nonetheless, highly multiplexed ISH ( Figures 2  and  5 ) confirm the major findings both about cell types and also gene expression and therefore substantiate the overall value of the data. The nuclear-based sequencing approach used here has advantages in preventing gene expression changes during single-cell isolation and is also likely to be less biased than cell-based approaches in terms of representation of the different cell types ( von Buchholtz et al., 2020 ). However, sn-RNA sequencing provides a somewhat distorted view of cellular gene expression, as has been described for sensory neurons in mice ( Nguyen et al., 2019 ). Therefore, it will be important to confirm expression levels of specific genes using complementary approaches. Finally, any functional roles for neuronal classes identified here have been extrapolated from expression of markers and distant similarity to mouse counterparts. Given the extensive differences that we report, some of these conclusions may need to be revised once cell class can be linked to neuronal function in human subjects and/or using physiological tools in vitro with human tissues. Materials and methods Key resources table Reagent type (species) or resource Designation Source or reference Identifiers Additional information Strain, strain  background  ( Mus musculus ) C57BL/6NCrl Charles River Strain code: 027 Male and female Antibody anti-NeuN (rabbit polyclonal) Millipore Cat#ABN78 (1:4000 for nuclei isolation)(1:1000 for IHC) Antibody anti-Tubb3 (mouse monoclonal) Proteintech Cat#66375-1-Ig (1:500) Antibody anti-rabbit Cy3-conjugated(donkey polyclonal) JacksonImmuno Research Cat#711-166-152 (1:1000) Antibody anti-mouse FITC-conjugated(donkey polyclonal) JacksonImmuno Research cat#715-096-150 (1:1000) Sequence-based reagent Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3′ GEM, Library & Gel Bead Kit v3.1 ×10 Genomics Cat#1000128 Sequence-based reagent Chromium Next GEM Chip G Single Cell Kit ×10 Genomics Cat#1000127 Commercial assay or kit RNAscope HiPlex8 Detection reagents Advanced Cell  Diagnostics Cat#324110 Commercial assay or kit RNAscope HiPlex12 Ancillary reagents Advanced Cell  Diagnostics Cat#324120 Commercial assay or kit Human RNAscope probes (HiPlex 12) Advanced Cell  Diagnostics NEFH  (cat# 448141);  TRPM8  (cat# 543121);  PIEZO2  (cat# 449951);  SCN10A  (cat# 406291);  NTRK2  (cat# 402621);  TAC1  (cat# 310711);  OSMR  (cat# 537121);  SST  (cat# 310591);  TRPV1  (cat# 415381);  PVALB  (cat# 422181) Commercial assay or kit RNAscope Fluorescent Multiplex assay Advanced Cell  Diagnostics Cat #320851 Commercial assay or kit Mouse RNAscope probes(MultiPlex) Advanced Cell  Diagnostics Scn10a  (cat#426011);  Nefh  (cat#443671) Commercial assay or kit Human RNAscope probes(MultiPlex) Advanced Cell  Diagnostics OSMR  (cat#537121);  SST  (cat# 310591);  HRH1  (cat#416501);  NPPB  (cat#448511); Commercial assay or kit NeuroTrace Green Fisher Scientific Cat# N21480 (1:100) Software, algorithm CellRanger ×10 Genomics Version 2.1.1 GRCh38.v25. premRNA Software, algorithm Seurat Satija lab Versions 3-4.04 
 https://satijalab.org/seurat/ 
 Software, algorithm Python 
 python.org 
 Version 3.7. Software, algorithm scipy.stats 
 scipy.org 
 Version 1.5.2 Software, algorithm scikit-learn 
 scikit-learn.org 
 Version 0.23.2 Software, algorithm RStudio 
 https://www.rstudio.com/ 
 Version 1.4.1106 Software, algorithm R 
 https://www.r-project.org/ 
 R version 4.1.1 Software, algorithm DoubletFinder 
 https://github.com/chris-mcginnis-ucsf/DoubletFinder 
 McGinnis lab ( McGinnis, 2021 ) Software, algorithm ImageJ 
 http://imagej.nih.gov/ij 
 ImageJ 1.53 c Software, algorithm Adobe Photoshop 
 https://www.adobe.com/ 
 25.5.1 release Software, algorithm kl_divergence 
 https://gist.github.com/lars-von-buchholtz/636f542ce8d93d5a14ae52a6c538ced5636f542ce8d93d5a14ae52a6c538ced5 
 Other RNA-later Thermo Fisher Cat# AM7021 Other Spectrum Bessman tissue pulverizer Fisher Scientific Cat# 08-418-3 Other Dounce homogenizer Fisher Scientific Cat# 357538 Other 40 μm cell strainer Thermo Fisher Cat# 08-771-1 Other Low bind microfuge tubes Sorenson  BioScience Cat# 11,700 Other SUPERaseIn RNase inhibitor Thermo Fisher Cat# AM2696 0.2 U/μl Other anti-rabbit IgG microbeads Miltenyi biotec Cat# 130-048-602 Other LS column Miltenyi biotec Cat# 130-042-401 Other Mouse DRG dataset Woolf lab GSE154659 Renthal et al., 2020 , Neuron Study design Transcriptomic analysis of human DRG neurons was carried out to establish similarities and differences between human somatosensory neurons and their counterparts in model organisms and to provide a resource. We chose a nuclear-based strategy because of its simplicity and quantitative nature relative to isolation of cells ( Nguyen et al., 2019 ). All tissue was obtained from de-identified organ donors and was not preselected or otherwise restricted according to health conditions. We used DRGs from both male and female donors for the sequencing and ISH localization experiments. Randomization and blinding were not used because of the nature of our experiments. Similarly, before starting this study, we had no relevant information for setting sample size for snRNA sequencing from human DRG neurons. Therefore, we stopped data collection when we empirically determined that the cost of adding extra data outweighed the benefit of additional sequencing. In essence, numbers of sn-transcriptomes analyzed were limited by the availability of material and the difficulty of isolating human DRG nuclei with preservation of their transcriptome. We considered that the dataset would serve as a valuable and relatively comprehensive resource once including additional material from an individual preparation made only minor differences to the pattern of clustering we observed. Criteria for data exclusion followed standards in the field (see below) and sample sizes and numbers of replicates are also typical for this type of study and are described in the relevant experimental sections. Apart from the exclusions described for sn experiments, all data obtained were included in our study. Isolation of human DRG nuclei DRG recovery was reviewed by the University of Cincinnati IRB #00003152; Study ID: 2015-5302, title Human dorsal root ganglia and was exempted. Lumbar L4 and L5 DRGs were recovered from donors withing 90 min of cross-clamp ( Valtcheva et al., 2016 ). For ISH and IHC, DRGs were immersion fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) overnight, cryoprotected in 30% sucrose and were frozen in Optimal Cutting Temperature compound (Tissue Tek). For RNA sequencing, human DRGs immediately were cut into 1–2 mm pieces and stored in RNA-later (Thermo Fisher, Cat# AM7021). Excess RNA-later was removed and the tissue was frozen on dry ice and stored at −80°C. Nuclei were isolated from each donor separately as described previously ( Nguyen et al., 2019 ) with minor modification. Briefly, the tissues were homogenized with a Spectrum Bessman tissue pulverizer (Fisher Scientific, CAT# 08-418-3) in liquid nitrogen. The sample was then transferred to a Dounce homogenizer (Fisher Scientific, Cat# 357538) in 1 ml of freshly prepared ice-cold homogenization buffer (250 mM sucrose, 25 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 1 µM DTT, 0.1% Triton X-100 [vol/vol]). To lyse cells and preserve nuclei homogenization used 5 strokes with the ‘loose’ pestle (A) and 15 strokes with the ‘tight’ pestle (B). The homogenate was filtered through a 40 µm cell strainer (Thermo Fisher, cat# 08-771-1), was transferred to low bind microfuge tubes (Sorenson BioScience, cat# 11700) and centrifuged at 800 g for 8 min at 4°C. The supernatant was removed, the pellet gently resuspended in 1 ml of PBS with 1% bovine serum Albumin (BSA) and SUPERaseIn RNase Inhibitor (0.2 U/µl; Thermo Fisher, Cat#AM2696) and incubated on ice for 10 min. Neuronal nuclei selection was performed by incubating the sample with a rabbit polyclonal anti-NeuN antibody (Millipore, cat#ABN78) at 1:4000 dilution with rotation at 4°C for 30 min. The sample was then washed with 1 ml of PBS with 1% BSA and SUPERaseIn RNase Inhibitor and centrifuged at 800 ×  g  for 8 min at 4°C. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 80 µl of PBS, 0.5% BSA, and 2 mM EDTA. 20 µl of anti-rabbit IgG microbeads (Miltenyi biotec, cat# 130-048-602) were added to the sample followed by a 20-min incubation at 4°C. Nuclei with attached microbeads were isolated using an LS column (Miltenyi Biotec, cat# 130-042-401) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The neuronal nuclei enriched eluate was centrifuged at 500 ×  g  for 10 min, 4°C. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was resuspended in 1.5 ml of PBS with 1% BSA. To disrupt any clumped nuclei, the sample was homogenized on ice with an Ultra-Turrax homogenizer (setting 1) for 30 s. An aliquot was then stained with trypan blue and the nuclei were counted using a hemocytometer. The nuclei were pelleted at 800 ×  g , 8 min at 4°C and resuspended in an appropriate volume for ×10 chromium capture. A second count was performed to confirm nuclei concentration and for visual inspection of nuclei quality. Note that prior to sequencing no check was made that this selection procedure was unbiased but we have previously used the approach to purify mouse trigeminal ganglion neuron nuclei ( Nguyen et al., 2019 ) and have demonstrated highly quantitative recovery of all neuronal types ( von Buchholtz et al., 2020 ). IHC analysis ( Figure 1—figure supplement 1 ) supports the use of NeuN enrichment as a means to purify human DRG neurons and together with ISH quantitation ( Figure 2—figure supplement 1 ) substantiates the relatively unbiased purification of various classes of neuronal nuclei using this method. Single nuclear capture, sequencing, and data analysis 10x-chromium capture and library generation were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions using v3 chemistry kits. Next generation sequencing was performed using Illumina sequencers. 10x chromium data were mapped using CellRanger to a pre-mRNA modified human genome (GRCh38.v25.premRNA). Data analysis used the Seurat V3 packages developed by the Satija lab and followed standard procedures for co-clustering ( Stuart et al., 2019 ). For sn-RNA sequencing experiments cell filtering was performed as follows: outliers were identified and removed based on the number of expressed genes (500–10,000 retained) and mitochondrial proportion (<10% retained). Normalization and variance stabilization used regularized negative binomial regression (sctransform). After initial co-clustering of data from the different preparations, non-neuronal cell clusters were identified by their gene expression profiles. Clusters not expressing high levels of neuronal or somatosensory genes like  SNAP25 ,  SCN9A ,  SCN10A ,  PIEZO2 ,  NEFH , etc. but instead expressing elevated levels of markers of non-neuronal cells including  PRP1 ,  MBP ,  QKI ,  LPAR1 , and  APOE  were tagged as non-neuronal and were removed to allow reclustering of ‘purified’ human DRG neurons. A total of 1837 human DRG neuronal nuclei were included in the analysis ( Table 1 ). The mean number of genes detected per nucleus was 2839 (range 501–9652), with a standard deviation of 1917. Doublet detection was performed on the individual datasets using DoubletFinder ( McGinnis et al., 2019 ). For the clustering shown in the main figures the small number of potential doublets ( Figure 1—figure supplement 2E ) were not removed; principal components (PCs) were determined from integrated assay data and PCs 1–16 were used both for UMAP display of the data and for determining clusters. The resolution for clustering used relatively low stringency (2.0) and closely related clusters without distinguishing markers were merged. Changes in display clustering parameters and in the cutoffs for data inclusion/exclusion as well as leaving out nuclei from any single preparation made differences in how the data were represented graphically and the number of clusters identified but not to the main conclusions ( Figure 1—figure supplement 3 ). All the different transcriptomically related neuron types described here could still be readily discerned in UMAP analysis of expression data. Identification of markers used the FindMarkers and FindAllMarkers functions of Seurat using default settings and with markers limited by a minimal level of expression in the positive cluster set using (min.pct = 0–0.3) and the difference in expression between positive and negative clusters set using (min.dif.pct = 0–0.3). Table 1. Sequencing data for the five individual DRG nuclear preparations. Preparation# DRG1-F36 DRG2-M36 DRG3a-F34 DRG3b-F34 DRG4-F35 DRG5-F55 Number of reads 273,123,313 121,333,026 105,113,253 101,427,234 90,306,793 94,069,716 Valid barcodes 97.50% 97.60% 98.20% 96.10% 93.60% 97.90% Sequencing saturation 93.20% 93.10% 39.70% 82.10% 38.70% 55.90% Q30 bases in barcode 96.30% 97.40% 97.80% 97.50% 97.70% 96.80% Q30 bases in RNA read 88.30% 85.90% 87.40% 91.50% 93.40% 92.20% Q30 bases in sample index 96.00% 96.80% 97.40% 96.60% 96.60% 94.80% Q30 bases in UMI 95.50% 97.00% 97.60% 97.00% 97.20% 96.10% Reads mapped confidently to genome 86.50% 81.20% 71.20% 16.90% 10.80% 18.10% Reads mapped confidently to intergenic regions 4.10% 4.20% 4.00% 1.30% 0.90% 1.20% Estimated number of cells 584 273 6,180 223 872 999 Mean reads per cell 467,676 444,443 17,008 454,830 135,189 94,163 Median genes per cell 1917 709 786 481 872 812 Total genes detected 24,646 17,559 28,759 17,338 24,798 25,027 Median UMI counts per cell 2929 862 965 663 1,293 988 DRG cells in final object 212 152 770 80 281 342 For analysis of the mouse, a random subset of data from sn-RNA sequencing of DRGs from wild type mice were extracted from data deposited by the Woolf lab ( Renthal et al., 2020 ) using the R-function: sample. The data were filtered according to gene count (400–12,000 retained) and mitochondrial DNA (<1% retained) leaving 6895 DRG nuclei that were clustered using standard methods ( Stuart et al., 2019 ). For the data that are displayed in most figures, PCs 1–20 were used for UMAP display with resolution for clustering set at 3.5; closely related clusters were merged. For  Figure 3—figure supplement 1 , PCs 1–30 were used for UMAP display with resolution for clustering set at 1.6; related clusters were not merged. The expression patterns that are described for genes in mice can also be checked in the outstanding and easy to search single-cell analysis provided by  Sharma et al., 2020 . Co-clustering of mouse and human data used methods described by the Satija lab ( Stuart et al., 2019 ). Briefly, we capitalized gene names in both mouse and human DRG-neuron data and then limited the datasets to genes that were shared between them. Mouse and human data were individually normalized and subjected to variance stabilization (sctransform) and were then combined using default parameters for integration (dims = 15). After integration, data were scaled and 30 PCs were calculated, used for UMAP display and clustering. Clustering resolution was set at 0.5 and cells were color coded by transferring their identity in the original clustering of human or mouse data. We experimented using different numbers of mouse neurons and found broadly similar results when approx. 1800, 3500, or 7000 mouse nuclei were used. However, although the relationships shown in  Figure 3  could be discerned using the lower numbers of mouse nuclei the mouse neurons were less organized (with some of the mouse clusters splitting). When we used substantially greater numbers of mouse neurons from the full Renthal dataset ( Renthal et al., 2020 ), the mouse neurons dominated the clustering and only co-clustering of large diameter neurons across species was observed with the other human and mouse nuclei clustering separately from each other. In order to quantify the similarity/dissimilarity between a given mouse cluster and any human cluster, the KL divergence between their distributions in 30-dimensional continuous space (PCs 1–30 from the co-clustering) was estimated as described previously ( Perez-Cruz, 2008 ) using R ( https://gist.github.com/lars-von-buchholtz/636f542ce8d93d5a14ae52a6c538ced5 ;  von Buchholtz, 2021a ). The natural logarithm of the KL divergences for each mouse/human pairing was plotted as a heatmap in R. ISH and IHC Cryosections from human DRGs (from different donors than those used for sequencing) were cut at 20 µm and used for ISH with the RNAscope HiPlex Assay (Advanced Cell Diagnostics) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The following probes were used:  NEFH  (cat# 448141);  TRPM8  (cat# 543121);  PIEZO2  (cat# 449951);  SCN10A  (cat# 406291);  NTRK2  (cat# 402621);  TAC1  (cat# 310711);  OSMR  (cat# 537121);  SST  (cat# 310591);  TRPV1  (cat# 415381); and  PVALB  (cat# 422181). We also used RNAscope Multiplex Fluorescent Assay (Advanced Cell Diagnostics) for localization of  OSMR  (cat# 537121);  NPPB  (cat# 448511);  HRH1  (cat# 416501); and  SST  (cat# 310591). Confocal microscopy (5 µm spaced optical sections for HiPlex and 1 µm spaced optical sections for Multiplex Assays) was performed with a Nikon C2 Eclipse Ti (Nikon) using a ×40 objective. All confocal images shown are collapsed (maximum projection) stacks. HiPlex images were aligned and adjusted for brightness and contrast in ImageJ as previously described ( von Buchholtz et al., 2020 ). Diagnostic probe combinations were used on at least three sections from at least two different individuals with qualitatively similar results. Overall, we used sections from ganglia from five different donors, however, the signal intensity of all probes varied between the individual ganglia making identification of positive signal risky in some cases. Strongest signals were observed for sections from an 18-year-old male donor and 23- and 35-year-old female donors. All images displayed here, and our analysis including cell counts were only from sections of ganglia isolated from these three individuals. When individual channels are displayed in the supplements, the strongest autofluorescence signals have been selected and superimposed using photoshop to help focus attention on ISH signal. IHC was carried out using 20 µm sections of human DRGs using standard procedures. Primary antibodies to NeuN (Millipore) and β3 tubulin (Proteintech) were used at 1:1000 and 1:500 dilution, respectively, and were visualized using appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated to fluorescent reporters (Jackson Immuno Research, 1:1000). Sections were counterstained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and/or green NeuroTrace (Fisher Scientific). Confocal images were acquired with a Nikon C2 Eclipse Ti (Nikon) using a ×40 objective with optical sections 5 µm apart. Images are maximum projection (collapsed) stacks of individual optical sections; consistency of NeuN staining was assessed using sections from two individuals; images were processed using Adobe Photoshop CC to adjust brightness, contrast, and set channel color for display. Animal experiments were carried out in strict accordance with the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals and were approved by the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research animal care and use committee (protocol #20-1041). Male and female mice were used for all experiments but were not analyzed separately. Mice were C57BL/6NCrl and were 6 weeks or older. Cryosections from fresh frozen mouse lumbar DRGs in OCT (Tissue-Tek) were cut at 10 µm and used for ISH with RNAscope Multiplex Fluorescent Assay (Advanced Cell Diagnostics) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Confocal images were acquired with a Nikon C2 Eclipse Ti (Nikon) using a ×10 objective at 1 µm optical section. Images are maximum projection (collapsed) stacks of 10 individual optical sections; consistency of staining was assessed using multiple sections from at least three mice as is considered standard; images were processed using Adobe Photoshop CC to adjust brightness, contrast, and set channel color for display. Spatial analysis of cell clusters In order to quantify spatial clustering of cell types, neurons in ISH images (for humans, one male, one female and for mice several sections from different DRGs and animals) were manually outlined and annotated as  NEFH -only or  SCN10A -only; cells expressing both genes were not counted. Centroid coordinates of these cells and their distances were analyzed in Python 3.7. The nearest neighbors were identified based on Euclidean distance (Scikit-Learn package) and the percentage of  NEFH  and  SCN10A  cells in each neighborhood of size 1–40 cells was calculated. Statistical significance between  NEFH - and  SCN10A -surrounding neighborhoods was determined using a one-tailed Mann–Whitney  U -test (Scipy Stats package). Funding Information This paper was supported by the following grants: http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000072 National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research 
 ZIC DE 000561  to Nicholas JP Ryba. http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000065 National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke 
 R01NS107356  to Steve Davidson. http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002 National Institutes of Health 
 RFNS113881  to Steve Davidson. Acknowledgements We thank the Genomics and Computational Biology Core (National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders) for sequencing; this work utilized the computational resources of the NIH HPC Biowulf cluster ( http://hpc.nih.gov ) and was supported in part by the Intramural Program of the National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research. We are indebted to the LifeCenter, Cincinnati and the donor families for their generosity. We also thank Drs. Mark Hoon, Claire Le Pichon, and Alexander Chesler and members of our groups for valuable suggestions. Additional information Competing interests No competing interests declared. No competing interests declared. Author contributions Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing. Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Software, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing. Investigation. Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing. Conceptualization, Data curation, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing. Ethics Animal experiments were carried out in strict accordance with the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals and were approved by the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research animal care and use committee (protocol #20-1041). Additional files Transparent reporting form Data availability Sequence data is available in GEO, accession number  GSE168243 ; a searchable version of the data will also be made available at https://seqseek.ninds.nih.gov/home. The following dataset was generated: 
 Nguyen M Ryba N Davidson S 2021 Single nucleus transcriptomic analysis of human dorsal root ganglion neurons NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus GSE168243 10.7554/eLife.71752 PMC8626086 34825887 
 The following previously published datasets were used: 
 Renthal W Yang L Tochitsky I Woolf C 2020 Transcriptional reprogramming of distinct peripheral sensory neuron subtypes after axonal injury NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus GSE154659 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.07.026 PMC7590250 32810432 
 References Abraira VE Ginty DD 2013 The sensory neurons of touch Neuron 79 618 639 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.07.051 23972592 PMC3811145 Ackerley R Watkins RH 2018 Microneurography as a tool to study the function of individual C-fiber afferents in humans: responses from nociceptors, thermoreceptors, and mechanoreceptors Journal of Neurophysiology 120 2834 2846 10.1152/jn.00109.2018 30256737 Adriaensen H Gybels J Handwerker HO Van Hees J 1983 Response properties of thin myelinated (A-delta) fibers in human skin nerves Journal of Neurophysiology 49 111 122 10.1152/jn.1983.49.1.111 6298373 Basbaum AI Bautista DM Scherrer G Julius D 2009 Cellular and molecular mechanisms of pain Cell 139 267 284 10.1016/j.cell.2009.09.028 19837031 PMC2852643 Bautista DM Siemens J Glazer JM Tsuruda PR Basbaum AI Stucky CL Jordt SE Julius D 2007 The menthol receptor TRPM8 is the principal detector of environmental cold Nature 448 204 208 10.1038/nature05910 17538622 Bautista DM Wilson SR Hoon MA 2014 Why we scratch an itch: the molecules, cells and circuits of itch Nature Neuroscience 17 175 182 10.1038/nn.3619 24473265 PMC4364402 Chen Y-C Auer-Grumbach M Matsukawa S Zitzelsberger M Themistocleous AC Strom TM Samara C Moore AW Cho LT-Y Young GT Weiss C Schabhüttl M Stucka R Schmid AB Parman Y Graul-Neumann L Heinritz W Passarge E Watson RM Hertz JM Moog U Baumgartner M Valente EM Pereira D Restrepo CM Katona I Dusl M Stendel C Wieland T Stafford F Reimann F von Au K Finke C Willems PJ Nahorski MS Shaikh SS Carvalho OP Nicholas AK Karbani G McAleer MA Cilio MR McHugh JC Murphy SM Irvine AD Jensen UB Windhager R Weis J Bergmann C Rautenstrauss B Baets J De Jonghe P Reilly MM Kropatsch R Kurth I Chrast R Michiue T Bennett DLH Woods CG Senderek J 2015 Transcriptional regulator PRDM12 is essential for human pain perception Nature Genetics 47 803 808 10.1038/ng.3308 26005867 PMC7212047 Chesler AT Szczot M Bharucha-Goebel D Čeko M Donkervoort S Laubacher C Hayes LH Alter K Zampieri C Stanley C Innes AM Mah JK Grosmann CM Bradley N Nguyen D Foley AR Le Pichon CE Bönnemann CG 2016 The Role of PIEZO2 in Human Mechanosensation The New England Journal of Medicine 375 1355 1364 10.1056/NEJMoa1602812 27653382 PMC5911918 Coste B Mathur J Schmidt M Earley TJ Ranade S Petrus MJ Dubin AE Patapoutian A 2010 Piezo1 and Piezo2 are essential components of distinct mechanically activated cation channels Science 330 55 60 10.1126/science.1193270 20813920 PMC3062430 Davidson S Golden JP Copits BA Ray PR Vogt SK Valtcheva MV Schmidt RE Ghetti A Price TJ 2016 Group II mGluRs suppress hyperexcitability in mouse and human nociceptors Pain 157 2081 2088 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000621 27218869 PMC4988887 Dong X Han S-k Zylka MJ Simon MI Anderson DJ 2001 A Diverse Family of GPCRs Expressed in Specific Subsets of Nociceptive Sensory Neurons Cell 106 619 632 10.1016/S0092-8674(01)00483-4 11551509 Drenth JPH Waxman SG 2007 Mutations in sodium-channel gene SCN9A cause a spectrum of human genetic pain disorders The Journal of Clinical Investigation 117 3603 3609 10.1172/JCI33297 18060017 PMC2096434 Gatto G Smith KM Ross SE Goulding M 2019 Neuronal diversity in the somatosensory system: bridging the gap between cell type and function Current Opinion in Neurobiology 56 167 174 10.1016/j.conb.2019.03.002 30953870 PMC6583900 Han L Ma C Liu Q Weng HJ Cui Y Tang Z Kim Y Nie H Qu L Patel KN Li Z McNeil B He S Guan Y Xiao B Lamotte RH Dong X 2013 A subpopulation of nociceptors specifically linked to itch Nature Neuroscience 16 174 182 10.1038/nn.3289 23263443 PMC3557753 Hill RZ Morita T Brem RB Bautista DM 2018 S1PR3 Mediates Itch and Pain via Distinct TRP Channel-Dependent Pathways The Journal of Neuroscience 38 7833 7843 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1266-18.2018 30082422 PMC6125817 Hockley JRF Taylor TS Callejo G Wilbrey AL Gutteridge A Bach K Winchester WJ Bulmer DC McMurray G Smith ESJ 2019 Single-cell RNAseq reveals seven classes of colonic sensory neuron Gut 68 633 644 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315631 29483303 PMC6580772 Huang CC Yang W Guo C Jiang H Li F Xiao M Davidson S Yu G Duan B Huang T Huang AJW Liu Q 2018 Anatomical and functional dichotomy of ocular itch and pain Nature Medicine 24 1268 1276 10.1038/s41591-018-0083-x 29988128 PMC6093777 Klein A Solinski HJ Malewicz NM Ieong HF-H Sypek EI Shimada SG Hartke TV Wooten M Wu G Dong X Hoon MA LaMotte RH Ringkamp M 2021 Pruriception and neuronal coding in nociceptor subtypes in human and nonhuman primates eLife 10 e64506 10.7554/eLife.64506 33891544 PMC8064749 Kupari J Usoskin D Parisien M Lou D Hu Y Fatt M Lönnerberg P Spångberg M Eriksson B Barkas N Kharchenko PV Loré K Khoury S Diatchenko L Ernfors P 2021 Single cell transcriptomics of primate sensory neurons identifies cell types associated with chronic pain Nature Communications 12 1510 10.1038/s41467-021-21725-z 33686078 PMC7940623 Le Pichon CE Chesler AT 2014 The functional and anatomical dissection of somatosensory subpopulations using mouse genetics Frontiers in Neuroanatomy 8 21 10.3389/fnana.2014.00021 24795573 PMC4001001 Liu Q Tang Z Surdenikova L Kim S Patel KN Kim A Ru F Guan Y Weng HJ Geng Y Undem BJ Kollarik M Chen ZF Anderson DJ Dong X 2009 Sensory neuron-specific GPCR Mrgprs are itch receptors mediating chloroquine-induced pruritus Cell 139 1353 1365 10.1016/j.cell.2009.11.034 20004959 PMC2989405 McGinnis CS Murrow LM Gartner ZJ 2019 DoubletFinder: Doublet Detection in Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Data Using Artificial Nearest Neighbors Cell Systems 8 329 337 10.1016/j.cels.2019.03.003 30954475 PMC6853612 McGinnis C 2021 DoubletFinder 554097b Github https://github.com/chris-mcginnis-ucsf/DoubletFinder McGlone F Wessberg J Olausson H 2014 Discriminative and affective touch: sensing and feeling Neuron 82 737 755 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.05.001 24853935 Mishra SK Hoon MA 2013 The cells and circuitry for itch responses in mice Science 340 968 971 10.1126/science.1233765 23704570 PMC3670709 Mogil JS 2019 The translatability of pain across species Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 374 20190286 10.1098/rstb.2019.0286 PMC6790385 31544615 Murthy SE Loud MC Daou I Marshall KL Schwaller F Kühnemund J Francisco AG Keenan WT Dubin AE Lewin GR Patapoutian A 2018 The mechanosensitive ion channel Piezo2 mediates sensitivity to mechanical pain in mice Science Translational Medicine 10 eaat9897 10.1126/scitranslmed.aat9897 30305457 PMC6709986 Nguyen MQ Le Pichon CE Ryba N 2019 Stereotyped transcriptomic transformation of somatosensory neurons in response to injury eLife 8 e49679 10.7554/eLife.49679 31592768 PMC6783272 Nickolls AR Lee MM Espinoza DF Szczot M Lam RM Wang Q Beers J Zou J Nguyen MQ Solinski HJ AlJanahi AA Johnson KR Ward ME Chesler AT Bönnemann CG 2020 Transcriptional Programming of Human Mechanosensory Neuron Subtypes from Pluripotent Stem Cells Cell Reports 30 932 946 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.12.062 31968264 PMC7059559 Oetjen LK Mack MR Feng J Whelan TM Niu H Guo CJ Chen S Trier AM Xu AZ Tripathi SV Luo J Gao X Yang L Hamilton SL Wang PL Brestoff JR Council ML Brasington R Schaffer A Brombacher F Hsieh CS Miller MJ Chen ZF Hu H Davidson S Liu Q Kim BS 2017 Sensory Neurons Co-opt Classical Immune Signaling Pathways to Mediate Chronic Itch Cell 171 217 228 10.1016/j.cell.2017.08.006 28890086 PMC5658016 Perez-Cruz F 2008 Kullback-Leibler Divergence Estimation of Continuous Distributions 2008 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory - ISIT 1666 1670 10.1109/ISIT.2008.4595271 Pongratz G Straub RH 2013 Role of peripheral nerve fibres in acute and chronic inflammation in arthritis Nature Reviews. Rheumatology 9 117 126 10.1038/nrrheum.2012.181 23147892 Price T Torck A Ray P Hassler S Hoffman J Boitano S Dussor G Vagner J 2016 RNA-seq based transcriptome profiling of human and mouse dorsal root ganglion reveals a potential role for Protease Activated Receptor 3 (PAR3) in pain processing The FASEB Journal 30 710 10.1096/fasebj.30.1_supplement.710.6 Ranade SS Woo S-H Dubin AE Moshourab RA Wetzel C Petrus M Mathur J Bégay V Coste B Mainquist J Wilson AJ Francisco AG Reddy K Qiu Z Wood JN Lewin GR Patapoutian A 2014 Piezo2 is the major transducer of mechanical forces for touch sensation in mice Nature 516 121 125 10.1038/nature13980 25471886 PMC4380172 Ray P Torck A Quigley L Wangzhou A Neiman M Rao C Lam T Kim JY Kim TH Zhang MQ Dussor G Price TJ 2018 Comparative transcriptome profiling of the human and mouse dorsal root ganglia: an RNA-seq-based resource for pain and sensory neuroscience research Pain 159 1325 1345 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001217 29561359 PMC6008200 Renthal W Tochitsky I Yang L Cheng YC Li E Kawaguchi R Geschwind DH Woolf CJ 2020 Transcriptional Reprogramming of Distinct Peripheral Sensory Neuron Subtypes after Axonal Injury Neuron 108 128 144 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.07.026 32810432 PMC7590250 Rostock C Schrenk-Siemens K Pohle J Siemens J 2018 Human vs. Mouse Nociceptors - Similarities and Differences Neuroscience 387 13 27 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.11.047 29229553 PMC6150929 Sharma N Flaherty K Lezgiyeva K Wagner DE Klein AM Ginty DD 2020 The emergence of transcriptional identity in somatosensory neurons Nature 577 392 398 10.1038/s41586-019-1900-1 31915380 PMC7307422 Shiers S Klein RM Price TJ 2020 Quantitative differences in neuronal subpopulations between mouse and human dorsal root ganglia demonstrated with RNAscope in situ hybridization Pain 161 2410 2424 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001973 32639368 PMC7899077 Solinski HJ Kriegbaum MC Tseng PY Earnest TW Gu X Barik A Chesler AT Hoon MA 2019 Nppb Neurons Are Sensors of Mast Cell-Induced Itch Cell Reports 26 3561 3573 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.02.089 30917312 PMC6490177 Stuart T Butler A Hoffman P Hafemeister C Papalexi E Mauck WM Hao Y Stoeckius M Smibert P Satija R 2019 Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data Cell 177 1888 1902 10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.031 31178118 PMC6687398 Szczot M Liljencrantz J Ghitani N Barik A Lam R Thompson JH Bharucha-Goebel D Saade D Necaise A Donkervoort S Foley AR Gordon T Case L Bushnell MC Bönnemann CG Chesler AT 2018 PIEZO2 mediates injury-induced tactile pain in mice and humans Science Translational Medicine 10 eaat9892 10.1126/scitranslmed.aat9892 30305456 PMC6875774 Tavares-Ferreira D Shiers S Ray PR Wangzhou A Jeevakumar V Sankaranarayanan I Chamessian A Copits BA Dougherty PM Gereau RW Burton MD Dussor G Price TJ 2021 Spatial Transcriptomics Reveals Unique Molecular Fingerprints of Human Nociceptors bioRxiv 10.1101/2021.02.06.430065 Valtcheva MV Copits BA Davidson S Sheahan TD Pullen MY McCall JG Dikranian K Gereau RW 2016 Surgical extraction of human dorsal root ganglia from organ donors and preparation of primary sensory neuron cultures Nature Protocols 11 1877 1888 10.1038/nprot.2016.111 27606776 PMC5082842 von Buchholtz LJ Lam RM Emrick JJ Chesler AT Ryba NJP 2020 Assigning transcriptomic class in the trigeminal ganglion using multiplex in situ hybridization and machine learning Pain 161 2212 2224 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001911 32379225 PMC7606614 von Buchholtz L 2021a kl_divergence.R GitHub https://gist.github.com/lars-von-buchholtz/636f542ce8d93d5a14ae52a6c538ced5 von Buchholtz LJ Ghitani N Lam RM Licholai JA Chesler AT Ryba NJP 2021b Decoding Cellular Mechanisms for Mechanosensory Discrimination Neuron 109 285 298 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.10.028 33186546 PMC9909446 Weng H-J Patel KN Jeske NA Bierbower SM Zou W Tiwari V Zheng Q Tang Z Mo GCH Wang Y Geng Y Zhang J Guan Y Akopian AN Dong X 2015 Tmem100 Is a Regulator of TRPA1-TRPV1 Complex and Contributes to Persistent Pain Neuron 85 833 846 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.065 25640077 PMC4336228 Wessberg J Olausson H Fernström KW Vallbo AB 2003 Receptive Field Properties of Unmyelinated Tactile Afferents in the Human Skin Journal of Neurophysiology 89 1567 1575 10.1152/jn.00256.2002 12626628 Yarmolinsky DA Zuker CS Ryba NJP 2009 Common sense about taste: from mammals to insects Cell 139 234 244 10.1016/j.cell.2009.10.001 19837029 PMC3936514 Yezierski RP Hansson P 2018 Inflammatory and Neuropathic Pain From Bench to Bedside: What Went Wrong? The Journal of Pain 19 571 588 10.1016/j.jpain.2017.12.261 29307749 Zhang S Edwards TN Chaudhri VK Wu J Cohen JA Hirai T Rittenhouse N Schmitz EG Zhou PY McNeil BD Yang Y Koerber HR Sumpter TL Poholek AC Davis BM Albers KM Singh H Kaplan DH 2021 Nonpeptidergic neurons suppress mast cells via glutamate to maintain skin homeostasis Cell 184 2151 2166 10.1016/j.cell.2021.03.002 33765440 PMC8052305 10.7554/eLife.71752.sa0 Editor's evaluation Seal Rebecca Reviewing Editor 
 University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine 
 United States 
 The manuscript by Nguyen et al. describes the assignment of neuronal cell types to human lumbar dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons based on the sequencing of individual nuclei. Bioinformatic comparison of these data to single nucleus sequencing results previously reported for mouse lumbar DRG is also described. The findings begin to close a gap in our understanding of how neuronal cell types and the expression of key genes differs between human and mouse. This kind of information is critical for targeted therapeutic efforts. 10.7554/eLife.71752.sa1 Decision letter Seal Rebecca Reviewing Editor 
 University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine 
 United States 
 Our editorial process produces two outputs: i)  public reviews  designed to be posted alongside  the preprint  for the benefit of readers; ii) feedback on the manuscript for the authors, including requests for revisions, shown below. We also include an acceptance summary that explains what the editors found interesting or important about the work. 
 Decision letter after peer review: 
 Thank you for submitting your article "Single nucleus transcriptomic analysis of human dorsal root ganglion neurons" for consideration by  eLife . Your article has been reviewed by 4 peer reviewers, one of whom is a member of our Board of Reviewing Editors, and the evaluation has been overseen by Catherine Dulac as the Senior Editor. The reviewers have opted to remain anonymous. The reviewers have discussed their reviews with one another, and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this to help you prepare a revised submission. This is clearly an important and timely study of the gene expression profiles of individual human primary sensory neurons. The authors have acute access to quickly harvest tissue from donors which is extremely beneficial. While the number of neurons and depth of sequencing is on the low side, the authors provide new insights into the molecular organization as well as a comparison to mouse which will be valuable for the field. To be suitable for publication in  eLife , the reviewers request that the manuscript is first strengthened by providing additional data, analysis and clarifications as outlined below. Essential revisions: 1. There is concern that additional evidence is needed to support two major claims of the paper: that there are mouse-specific and human-specific neuron subtypes. These are issues stemming from the bioinformatics and from comparing datasets that were not generated in parallel. The in situ hybridization experiments provide some support for species specificity, but expression of individual marker genes may evolve while the overall cell population remains consistent. To address these issues, the authors should: a) Add doublet detection; b) Attempt different levels of clustering (number of clusters) and show the results are robust; c) Try different methods and parameters of co-clustering across species; d) Try a method of comparing across species that doesn't depend on the exact clusters same clusters found in the analysis. For example, this might involve training a classifier in mouse to predict cell type from gene expression. Then, applying it to human and showing that clearly conserved cell types show up, but that none of the species-specific populations are correctly labeled. 2. The reviewers had concern about the NeuN method of isolation. Was the technique in any way validated given the large number of non-neuronal cells and could there also have been bias in neurons that were selected by using this method, as it was pointed out that the levels of NeuN can vary across neuronal subtypes? Evidence validating the sorting and evidence against bias should be included, including plotting the distribution of UMIs and genes as well as using more than one glial marker. 3. The number of nuclei that were sequenced and the depth of sequencing are low. Can the authors make a short statement indicating that although this work enables a better understanding of the subsets of human sensory neurons, the readers should keep in mind that this classification will be further refined as more studies or larger samples are added 4. The authors should perform in situ for NPPB and also quantify all of the in situ data. 5. The execution of the experiment looking at organization of NEHF and SCN10A positive cells in the human DRG is not entirely compelling based on the few images shown but the quantification is potentially better. Depending on how strongly the authors want to claim the "spatial clustering" model, the authors should perform additional quantification/modeling and also similar analysis with mouse DRG neurons. 
 Reviewer #3 (Recommendations for the authors): 
 The most obvious factor to strengthen this paper would be to increase the number of nuclei used in the clustering analysis. This may be complicated by experimental issues, such as the need to run samples in parallel. They can perhaps make a short statement indicating that although this work enables a better understanding of the subsets of human sensory neurons, that the readers should keep in mind that this classification will be further refined as more studies or larger samples are added. One other note is that there is less interest in the multiple comparisons to the mouse classification, but more on defining the sensory profiles in human. Just describing how one class of sensory neurons has the possibility to be polymodal based on its expression of different receptors, and build on that in the Results section. The part about adaptation to ecological niches in the discussion is exactly what this paper can bring that is unique and exciting. For instance, I find this very interesting that sensory neurons innervating hairy vs. non-hairy skin neurons get prioritized for human somatosensation compared to the mouse. On another note: do the authors know whether they aren't biasing their analysis for neurons of large or small diameter, they shouldn't be (since there isn't really a size filtration step) but maybe it would be worthwhile for them to do a sort of population study where they look at the overall diameters of neurons and generate ratios of large to medium to small diameter neurons in the human DRG and compare it to mouse. Then maybe comparing the markers used for a FISH to generate ratios of how much those cells occur in their snRNASeq data to confirm that they aren't accidentally biasing their analysis. Figure 1: they need to state the number of nuclei analyzed in the text, not just the figure legend. Figure 1: they should show a table with the number of nuclei from each donor. Lines 379-381: they acknowledge that they have higher neuron recovery, but the tradeoff is lower read depth – wouldn't read depth be of the utmost priority when making claims about new classes of sensory neurons in humans? Figure 2D: The authors claim that most neurons are labelled, yet from the image it seems like there are major gaps (that look like places where we'd find large diameter neurons based on the size). Did they use DAPI or any other counterstain at all to illustrate what the number of neurons actually was? The authors claim they do not detect Mrgprd. Can they comment on the accuracy of snRNAseq at detecting low level transcripts? Is it that other low-level transcripts are undetectable? Can they comment on whether this could be a limitation of the technique? Can the authors discuss the Shiers study published in Bioarchives from the lab of Ted Price, where they found that TRPV1 was broadly expressed? Overall, I find this manuscript to be very important for the field of pain research and will be accessed frequently by pain scientists. 
 Reviewer #4 (Recommendations for the authors): 
 The number of cells and the depth of the sequencing are on the low end. One potential consequence is that populations such as c-LTRMs, which were reported by mouse studies and by the macaque and other human study are missing. Thus, it likely that there are not enough data to generate a comprehensive representation of all of the cell types. A bioinformatic comparison to the macaque would help to clarify some issues with what is different between these two important studies. In any case, a table that compares the cell types identified in the macaque and the other human study with this one would be very helpful. Information about the number of nuclei and "depth of sequencing" comparison across studies within this table or figure would also be helpful. The number of neuronal nuclei and genes per nuclei need to be stated upfront in the results. The absence of C-LTMRs in the data is surprising. In mouse, C-LTMRs share features and genes with non-peptidergic neurons, are cooling sensitive and mechanically sensitive though the cooling sensitivity in mice is not likely mediated by Trpm8. How does the macaque c-LTMR cluster compare to the human data? How do the C-LTMRs assigned by the Price lab study compare? For the comparison to mouse, the authors state that a random subset of Renthal data was used. Perhaps a better description of this would be helpful particularly what was in the subset? It is unclear why the full set would enrich for larger neurons. Authors list genes that are not found in human data but are in mouse as well as a population that is in human that may not be in mouse. Page 8. The authors should use RT-PCR to see if the gene isn't expressed or if there is efficient nuclear export issue or annotation issue. The authors should quantify the in situ data. Confusing about how H5 has a mouse counterpart with a few different genes (single cell comparison) but then H9 doesn't have a mouse counterpart. Were computational methods used to compare to the single cell mouse data? The logic of sentence on lines 217-220 escapes me. If the snRNA.Seq representation was not comprehensive I assume that you could get the same result – all cells have one of these genes and they are generally non-overlapping. Organization to the DRG would make sense as it is a common theme for sensory systems and for the somatosensory system. The data are in the supplementary where the images are not entirely convincing (3-D reconstruction of 3 or 4 DRG would be more convincing) but the analysis seems to suggest this could be true. The authors suggest this organization is present in human but not mouse. The distribution of myelinated and unmyelinated should be shown for mouse using the same approach. 
 Reviewer #5 (Recommendations for the authors): 
 – It's a bit odd that quality of the NeuN sorting wasn't experimentally validated, especially given the large numbers of non-neuronal nuclei for a sorted experiment. The lack of structure in the non-neuronal cells could indicate that these droplets were empty or contained highly damaged cells. Plotting the distribution of UMIs and genes, as well as more than one glial marker could help resolve this. – Levels of NeuN itself can vary across neurons subtypes (https://celltypes.brain-map.org/rnaseq/human_m1_10x). Could these be responsible for the differences in cell type across species? – Seurat has different options for clustering included, each of them with a number of parameter options. There is not enough detail in the methods to identify if it was appropriate. In particular, how were the number of clusters identified? Do they really reflect distinct cell types or are there continuous signals? Similarly, the parameters outlier removal aren't described. These are especially critical for post-mortem experiments that can contain damaged cells. – The length of time between subject death and sample collection should be included. – There should be computation procedure for identifying/removing doublets. – The number of and distribution of UMIs per nucleus in the human dataset should be reported. – What parameters and function were used for the co-clustering between human and mouse? – The KL divergence calculated identifies similarities for cell classes and seems to perform reasonably. However, I am not aware of that test being commonly used to link cell populations across species. What is the justification for using it. – The procedure for identifying markers within and across species is not well-described. In particular, differences in the representation of different cell types across species could lead to artifacts in which markers are identified. Furthermore, since much of manuscript is devoted to differences between mouse and human expression, a statistical procedure should be used to verify the ability of particular genes to label a population in one species versus another. [Editors' note: further revisions were suggested prior to acceptance, as described below.] Thank you for resubmitting your work entitled "Single nucleus transcriptomic analysis of human dorsal root ganglion neurons" for further consideration by  eLife . Your revised article has been reviewed by 3 peer reviewers and the evaluation has been overseen by Catherine Dulac as the Senior Editor, and a Reviewing Editor. The manuscript has been significantly improved. There is one remaining issue that still needs to be further clarified or the claim tempered; namely there is concern that the authors have not convincingly proven that species specific cell types exist. Although the authors have argued the limitations of the bioinformatic approaches, it is suggested that they try generating substantially smaller clusters of cells in mouse (~twice the number of clusters). In this case, if none of these mouse sub-populations have a match to the human clusters based on KL divergence, that would substantially strengthen the argument that the human population is not conserved in mouse. 10.7554/eLife.71752.sa2 Author response Essential revisions: 1. There is concern that additional evidence is needed to support two major claims of the paper: that there are mouse-specific and human-specific neuron subtypes. These are issues stemming from the bioinformatics and from comparing datasets that were not generated in parallel. The in situ hybridization experiments provide some support for species specificity, but expression of individual marker genes may evolve while the overall cell population remains consistent. To address these issues, the authors should: a) Add doublet detection; We added doublet detection Figure 1—figure supplement 2E. b) Attempt different levels of clustering (number of clusters) and show the results are robust; We added different clustering parameters to show robustness (Figure 1—figure supplement 3). c) Try different methods and parameters of co-clustering across species; Co-clustering of DRG data across species is a significant challenge because of the dramatic differences in gene expression even amongst the most conserved classes. As stated in the paper the Satija lab methodology was developed to find similarities across datasets without forcing matches. We also used CONOS: a program that provides significant flexibility for setting parameters. Using PCAs or PCCAs CONOS did not align mouse and human DRG data. With CCAs and parameters as used by Kupari et al., human and mouse DRG data appear to be closely related. However, these parameters inappropriately match human cortical excitatory and inhibitory neurons, DRG neurons with cortical excitatory neurons and even peripheral blood mononuclear cells with brain inhibitory neuron nuclei. Therefore, we have not included the analysis in our revised manuscript. d) Try a method of comparing across species that doesn't depend on the exact clusters same clusters found in the analysis. For example, this might involve training a classifier in mouse to predict cell type from gene expression. Then, applying it to human and showing that clearly conserved cell types show up, but that none of the species-specific populations are correctly labeled. It is not entirely clear what the reviewers are asking for; Kupari et al. trained a classifier with mouse data and then used it on macaque data (which seems to be what the reviewers want us to do), but this method forces a cell to “match” one of the mouse neuron types and has no control to ascertain validity. A serious concern is that all statistical evaluation of such an analysis assumes the basic tenet that testing data come from the same distribution as training data. This is clearly violated in across species comparisons. Moreover, the analysis does not evaluate closeness of relationships: the probability of a match is not a measure of similarity but of ambiguity between the limited prediction choices. For example, human cells in a cluster with gene expression features resembling three classes of neurons in mouse would distribute amongst the three clusters because of random differences at the single cell level. By contrast, cells in a cluster with very little similarity to any type of mouse neurons may be assigned to a single class because each cell needs to be matched to one of the mouse classes. We have not come up with an alternative that overcomes these problems. This is why we used Kullback-Leibler divergence to examine similarities between the robust clusters identified in mouse and human data. We now explain the appropriateness and rationale for using this method in the Results section (lines 234-241; line numbers refer to the word document with track changes all markup selected). 2. The reviewers had concern about the NeuN method of isolation. Was the technique in any way validated given the large number of non-neuronal cells and could there also have been bias in neurons that were selected by using this method, as it was pointed out that the levels of NeuN can vary across neuronal subtypes? Evidence validating the sorting and evidence against bias should be included, including plotting the distribution of UMIs and genes as well as using more than one glial marker. We have used this approach in mice but had not tested if the NeuN method was biased in humans before use. However, we needed to deplete the roughly 100-fold excess of non-neuronal nuclei in human DRGs. We have now carried out immunohistochemistry using the NeuN antibody and demonstrate that the vast majority of neurons (but not other cells) are robustly stained in sections (new Figure 1—figure supplement 1). We believe this will be valuable information for readers and should assuage reviewers’ concerns. 3. The number of nuclei that were sequenced and the depth of sequencing are low. Can the authors make a short statement indicating that although this work enables a better understanding of the subsets of human sensory neurons, the readers should keep in mind that this classification will be further refined as more studies or larger samples are added Statement added to discussion (lines 427-428) 4. The authors should perform in situ for NPPB and also quantify all of the in situ data. NPPB  expression is not a focus of this paper and is only mentioned once in passing in the results. Nonetheless, we obtained relevant probes and carried out this request. As expected from the sequence data and in agreement with previous ISH data published by other groups, our data demonstrate low-level expression of  NPPB  in H10 and H11 neurons (new Figure 5—figure supplement 1A). At the reviewers’ request, we also include extensive quantitation of ISH data (new Figure 2—figure supplement 1). Despite recent trends to “quantitate” all ISH data, we are not keen on this level of analysis (unless it can be done by automated signal detection) because many factors can influence the scoring of positives. Extensive autofluorescence makes automated signal detection impractical for human DRGs, thus we concentrated on diagnostic genes. 5. The execution of the experiment looking at organization of NEHF and SCN10A positive cells in the human DRG is not entirely compelling based on the few images shown but the quantification is potentially better. Depending on how strongly the authors want to claim the "spatial clustering" model, the authors should perform additional quantification/modeling and also similar analysis with mouse DRG neurons. This is not a major point of the paper but helps explain the anatomically clustered nature of rare but related cell-types including proprioceptors and “cool sensing” cells. Nearest neighbor analysis provides a strong argument for organization at the level of the large diameter non-nociceptive neurons (NEFH-only) and the smaller nociceptors (SCN10A-only): for up to 40 nearest neighbors of 803 single positive cells in 2 sections, the maximum p-value was < 7 x 10 -42 . We have moved this analysis to the main figure to highlight the quantitative measure. We carried out the same analysis in mice Figure 4—figure supplement 2 as requested by the referees. Our data demonstrate that a similar organization is also present there strengthening the conclusions by showing conservation across species. Reviewer #3 (Recommendations for the authors): […] Figure 1: they need to state the number of nuclei analyzed in the text, not just the figure legend. Figure 1: they should show a table with the number of nuclei from each donor. We moved the number to the text and list the nuclei from each donor in the table. Figure 2D: The authors claim that most neurons are labelled, yet from the image it seems like there are major gaps (that look like places where we'd find large diameter neurons based on the size). Did they use DAPI or any other counterstain at all to illustrate what the number of neurons actually was? Neurons are well spaced in human DRGs and surrounded by nerve fibers and other structures; we provide an image in the supplement where the brightness/contrast has been adjusted to highlight this point. See also new Figure 1—figure supplement 1 for DAPI and other counterstaining. The authors claim they do not detect Mrgprd. Can they comment on the accuracy of snRNAseq at detecting low level transcripts? Is it that other low-level transcripts are undetectable? Can they comment on whether this could be a limitation of the technique? We already addressed the limitations of snRNAseq in the paper and explained that the low expression of  MRGPRD  in human DRG neurons was consistent with recently published ISH images for this transcript showing expression close to the detection limit of the technique. By contrast, in mouse  Mrgprd -expression is very robust. Can the authors discuss the Shiers study published in Bioarchives from the lab of Ted Price, where they found that TRPV1 was broadly expressed? Our data and theirs are consistent; we have added a sentence to the discussion and reference to the now published Shiers paper (ref-43, lines 346-349). Reviewer #4 (Recommendations for the authors): The number of cells and the depth of the sequencing are on the low end. One potential consequence is that populations such as c-LTRMs, which were reported by mouse studies and by the macaque and other human study are missing. Thus, it likely that there are not enough data to generate a comprehensive representation of all of the cell types. A bioinformatic comparison to the macaque would help to clarify some issues with what is different between these two important studies. In any case, a table that compares the cell types identified in the macaque and the other human study with this one would be very helpful. Information about the number of nuclei and "depth of sequencing" comparison across studies within this table or figure would also be helpful. The number of neuronal nuclei and genes per nuclei need to be stated upfront in the results. The absence of C-LTMRs in the data is surprising. In mouse, C-LTMRs share features and genes with non-peptidergic neurons, are cooling sensitive and mechanically sensitive though the cooling sensitivity in mice is not likely mediated by Trpm8. How does the macaque c-LTMR cluster compare to the human data? How do the C-LTMRs assigned by the Price lab study compare? Note we do not think that humans have no cLTMRs merely that they don’t have an identifiable group of cells that correspond with the mouse neurons that are thought to play this role (see lines 391-400). We have added some discussion about the macaque study (lines 160-161 and 335-402) but the differences in approaches (e.g., cells vs nuclei) make extensive comparisons difficult. The Price lab study has not yet been published and the original bioRxiv version did not assign any neurons as cLTMRs. This was changed at a later time making it dangerous to extensively evaluate similarities and differences between our study and theirs since their interpretation may yet change. Therefore, we have removed most of the discussion we had about the spatial transcriptomic analysis but now point out (lines 397-400) that our speculation that H10 neurons may function as cLTMRs is consistent with their assignment of transcriptomically similar cells as cLTMRs. For the comparison to mouse, the authors state that a random subset of Renthal data was used. Perhaps a better description of this would be helpful particularly what was in the subset? It is unclear why the full set would enrich for larger neurons. We added more detail to the methods. The full Renthal dataset does not enrich for larger neurons but clusters in the same way as smaller subsets; we used the smaller group to prevent the mouse data overwhelming the human data in co-clustering as is now explained more carefully in the methods. The smaller subsets of mouse data (including just 1800 nuclei like our human dataset) are also (1) just as informative as the full dataset in terms of clustering and (2) more efficient to use computationally. The logic of sentence on lines 217-220 escapes me. If the snRNA.Seq representation was not comprehensive I assume that you could get the same result – all cells have one of these genes and they are generally non-overlapping. Thanks, we have rewritten the sentence to better explain our interest in these 3 genes. Reviewer #5 (Recommendations for the authors): […] – The number of and distribution of UMIs per nucleus in the human dataset should be reported. Added to Figure 1—figure supplement 2D. – What parameters and function were used for the co-clustering between human and mouse? – The procedure for identifying markers within and across species is not well-described. In particular, differences in the representation of different cell types across species could lead to artifacts in which markers are identified. We have added more detail to the methods. [Editors' note: further revisions were suggested prior to acceptance, as described below.] The manuscript has been significantly improved. There is one remaining issue that still needs to be further clarified or the claim tempered; namely there is concern that the authors have not convincingly proven that species specific cell types exist. Although the authors have argued the limitations of the bioinformatic approaches, it is suggested that they try generating substantially smaller clusters of cells in mouse (~twice the number of clusters). In this case, if none of these mouse sub-populations have a match to the human clusters based on KL divergence, that would substantially strengthen the argument that the human population is not conserved in mouse. We carried out the requested analysis (19 clusters rather than 10) and demonstrate that with increased granularity in the mouse data, the same relationships between human and mouse cell types are seen (new Figure 3—figure supplement 1). Importantly, neither subcluster of mouse cLTMRs is a good match for any type of human DRG-neurons. Similarly, the human neuronal classes that only poorly matched the mouse clusters were not better matched to any of the subdivided mouse cell types. Nonetheless we also toned down the abstract.